GOOD EVENING, EVERYONE, WELCOME
TO THE APRIL 17 WORK SESSION
THE ANN ARBOR CITY COUNCIL WITH
RESPECT TO THE DOWNTOWN
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY PLAN
UPDATE AND THE ARBOR SOUTH
PROJECT.
MR. TONY, YOU HAVE WRITTEN A
COUNCIL THANK YOU.
THE FIRST ITEM TONIGHT WILL BE
THE DDA TALKING ABOUT THEIR
WORK PLAN.
I WILL POINT OUT TO YOU THAT
THE ADMINISTRATION WILL BE
REPLYING TO THE INFORMATION
THAT YOU'RE GOING TO HEAR
TONIGHT BUT WE WON'T BE DOING
THAT TONIGHT.
WE WILL LIKELY PROVIDE YOU WITH
WRITTEN FEEDBACK AT SOME POINT
AFTER THE BUDGET IS ROLLED OUT
NEXT WEEK.
MORE TOPICS WILL BE KICKING
THINGS OFF AND I'LL TURN IT
OVER TO HER.
THANK YOU MR..
TO HELP ME.
YOU JUST HAVE TO WAIT FOR MY
PRESENTATION TO COME UP AND
START.
>> OK, GREAT.
MAYOR TAYLOR COUNCIL.
>> I WANT TO EXPRESS OUR
APPRECIATION OUR APPRECIATION
FOR HAVING THIS TIME WITH YOU
TONIGHT.
I AM JOINED TONIGHT BY A FEW
OF MY COLLEAGUES AND MEMBERS
OF OUR CONSULTING TEAM.
SO TONIGHT PRESENTING YOU'RE
GOING TO HEAR FROM AMBER MILLER
WHO IS THE DA'S CAPITAL
PROJECTS AND PLANNING MANAGER.
YOU'RE GOING TO HEAR FROM
OLIVER KILEY FROM SMITH GROUP
AND ROB BECKER BACK AT GLOOPY
FROM MISSION NORTH.
>> AND BEFORE WE JUMP IN FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE PUBLIC WHO
MAY NOT BE AS FAMILIAR WITH THE
DEA AS COUNSEL IS, I JUST WANT
TO MAKE AN IMPORTANT NOTE THAT
THE DEA DOES RUN TWO SEPARATE
SYSTEMS.
WE RUN A PARKING SYSTEM AND WE
RUN A TAX INCREMENT FINANCE
SYSTEM BETTER KNOWN AS TEEF AND
TEF IS WHAT WE ARE FOCUSED ON
TONIGHT.
>> SO WE'RE HERE TO TALK TO YOU
ABOUT THE WORK THAT'S BEEN
GOING ON FOR THE LAST 18 MONTHS
IN CREATING A NEW DEVELOPMENT
PLAN.
WE HAVE THREE KEY ELEMENTS
OF THAT PLAN THAT WE NEED TO
DISCUSS WITH YOU OUR BOUNDARY,
OUR FINANCE PLAN AND POTENTIAL
PROJECTS AND PROGRAMS SO THERE
WILL BE TWO KEY DECISIONS THAT
COUNCIL WILL NEED TO MAKE WHEN
WE HAVE OUR DEVELOPMENT PLAN
COMPLETED AND BRING TO YOU IN
AUGUST FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION.
>> ONE OF THOSE DECISIONS IS
REGARDING OUR CURRENT OUR
CURRENT FUNDING MODEL AND THE
POTENTIAL SWITCH TO A GAIN
SHARE MODEL AND THE SECOND IS
RELATED TO THE DDA BOUNDARY.
SO THESE TWO DECISIONS RESULT
IN FOUR POTENTIAL SCENARIOS
THAT WE'RE GOING TO WALK YOU
THROUGH TONIGHT TO DEMONSTRATE
THE ANTICIPATED OUTCOMES
OF EACH AND FROM YOUR FEEDBACK
WE WILL DETERMINE WHAT IS
INCLUDED IN THAT NEW PLAN.
SO TO GIVE YOU A PREVIEW
OF WHERE WE'RE GOING WITH THIS
PRESENTATION AND THERE IS QUITE
A BIT OF CONTENT WE ARE
ACTUALLY GOING TO BE LANDING ON
A RECOMMENDED SCENARIO THAT
INCLUDES A MODERATE BOUNDARY
EXPANSION AND A SHIFT TO A GAIN
SHARE MODEL OF TIF
DISTRIBUTION.
WE BELIEVE THIS IS A GOOD
MIDDLE GROUND APPROACH.
IT ALLOWS A DDA TO RESPOND TO
IMPORTANT NEEDS DOWNTOWN AND IT
ALSO ALLOWS US TO SUPPORT AN
EVOLVING DOWNTOWN WHILE WE WILL
BE OFFSETTING COSTS IN SOME
AREAS.
WE ALSO RECOGNIZE THAT THERE
ARE NEAR-TERM TRADE OFFS AND
IMPACTS TO THE GENERAL FUND.
THESE ARE CHALLENGING TIMES FOR
ALL ORGANIZATIONS.
OUR ROLE IS TO SUPPORT CITY
GOALS AND WE ARE LOOKING FOR
YOUR DIRECTION ON THE BEST WAY
THAT WE CAN DO THAT.
AND JUST AS A REMINDER, TIFF IS
A REVENUE SHARING TOOL AND THE
DDA IS A MECHANISM FOR THE CITY
TO USE THAT TOOL.
SO WHAT DO WE WANT TO
ACCOMPLISH HERE TONIGHT?
FIRST WE HOPE THAT WE CONVEY
HOW WE APPROACH OUR WORK WHICH
IS TO MAXIMIZE THE BENEFIT
OF THE FUNDS THAT WE ARE
INTERESTED.
THE SECOND THING WE HOPE TO
ACCOMPLISH IS THAT WE ARE
GIVING YOU ENOUGH INFORMATION
THAT YOU CAN SEE HOW WE LANDED
ON THE SCENARIO THAT WE'RE THAT
WE'RE LANDING ON AND GOING TO
SHARE WITH YOU TONIGHT.
SO WILL VERY BRIEFLY TALK ABOUT
PLAN REQUIREMENTS AND THE BULK
OF THIS PRESENTATION WILL BE
SPENT
ON THOSE THREE KEY
ELEMENTS I MENTIONED EARLIER
OUR BOUNDARY, OUR FUNDING AND
THEN THOSE DRAFT SCENARIOS AND
THEN OF COURSE TIME FOR
DISCUSSION AND WE LOOK FORWARD
TO YOUR FEEDBACK.
>> SO JUST A REMINDER OF THE
DELIVERABLE YOU WILL SEE FROM
US IN AUGUST A DENHA
DEVELOPMENT PLAN IS REQUIRED BY
STATUTE AND IT'S VERY
PRESCRIBED.
WE TALK ABOUT IT AS A
DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
IT'S ACTUALLY TWO SEPARATE
PLANS SO YOU WILL SEE A
DEVELOPMENT PLAN WHICH JUST
ESTABLISHES OUR BOUNDARY AND
THE PROJECTS AND PROGRAMS WE
WOULD TAKE ON SEPARATELY A TAX
INCREMENT FINANCE PLAN WHICH
ESTIMATES THE TIF REVENUE AND
SHOWS HOW WE WILL USE THOSE
FUNDS.
SO WITH THAT I AM GOING TO HAND
IT OVER TO MY COLLEAGUE AMBER
MILLER.
>> THANK YOU MA'AM.
OK, SO KEEPING THE REQUIREMENTS
THAT MORE OF THOSE SHARED IN
MIND WE WANT TO WALK YOU
THROUGH THOSE KEY DECISIONS
STARTING WITH OUR CAPITAL
PROJECTS WHICH IS OUR PRIMARY
PURPOSE AND FOCUS WITHIN OUR
BOUNDARY.
OUR WORK HAS BEEN GUIDED BY A
COMMITMENT TO THE CITY'S VALUES
AND USING INFRASTRUCTURE
INVESTMENT AS A TOOL TO MEET
THESE NEEDS.
WE'VE WORKED HARD TO DELIVER
VALUE DRIVEN OUTCOMES THAT
ALIGN WITH THE GOALS YOU SEE ON
THE SCREEN AND WE'RE SHAPING
THIS NEXT PHASE TO CONTINUE
THAT ALIGNMENT.
THIS COMMITMENT ENCOURAGES US
TO INVEST IN A RANGE
OF PROJECTS.
WE KNOW THAT GREAT DOWNTOWNS
HAVE A FOCUS ON PLACEMAKING AND
CREATING SPACES THAT WELCOME
ALL PEOPLE PROVIDING EQUITABLE
ACCESS THROUGH INVESTMENTS AND
TRANSIT RESILIENT UTILITY
INFRASTRUCTURE, A RANGE
OF HOUSING OPTIONS AND MORE.
OUR INTENT IS TO FUND ACROSS A
RANGE OF PROJECT TYPES.
ONE WAY WE CAN DO THAT IS BY
EMPHASIZING LARGE MULTIFACETED
PROJECTS THAT CUT ACROSS
STRATEGIC VALUES TO HELP MAKE
THESE PROJECTS HAPPEN WE CAN
PARTNER WITH OTHER PARTS OF THE
CITY AND PAY FOR THE ELEMENTS
THAT LACK A DEDICATED FUNDING
SOURCE.
THE FIFTH AVENUE IN DETROIT
STREET PROJECT.
AS AN EXAMPLE OF THIS OUR
CONTRIBUTION PAID FOR NEARLY
EVERYTHING YOU SEE ABOVE GROUND
INCLUDING IMPROVED CROSSWALKS
AND STREETSCAPE.
>> WE CAN ALSO FUND THE FULL
PROJECT COST EVERYTHING BELOW
AND ABOVE GROUND TO MAKE A
PRIORITY PROJECT HAPPEN.
THIS WAS OUR APPROACH WITH THE
FIRST NATIONAL PROJECT WHICH
YOU SEE ON THE SCREEN HERE AND
IT WAS NEARLY ONE HUNDRED
PERCENT FUNDED PROJECTS LIKE
THIS HELP BRING MORE PEOPLE
DOWNTOWN AND TO DOWNTOWN
BUSINESSES.
VISITS TO THESE STREETS ROSE
NEARLY 30 PERCENT AFTER THE
CHANGES.
AS PART OF OUR CAPITAL WORK
WE'RE COMMITTED TO MORE FOCUSED
INVESTMENTS AS WELL WHERE THE
ONLY PART OF THE CITY THAT
INSTALLS AND MAINTAINS THE
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT'S UNIQUE TO
DOWNTOWN INCLUDING PUBLIC
SEATING PAVERS AND TREE GRATES
WE ALSO CONTRIBUTE
SIGNIFICANTLY TO ANNUAL
STREETLIGHTS AND SIDEWALK
MAINTENANCE.
IN ADDITION, WE FUND UTILITY
UPSIZING AND STREETSCAPE
RESTORATION FOR HOUSING
COMMISSION DEVELOPMENTS AND WE
PLAN TO CONTINUE OUR NEWLY
CREATED ELEVATE PUBLIC ART
PROGRAM AND TEF IS A TOOL THAT
MAKES ALL OF THIS POSSIBLE
REGIONAL CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE
COUNTY, THE LIBRARY, THE DATA
AND WCC HELP FUND CAPITAL
PROJECTS AND MAINTENANCE IN OUR
REGIONAL DOWNTOWN WITHOUT THIS
TOOL IN PLACE ALL FUTURE
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS AND
MAINTENANCE COSTS WILL GO
UNDONE OR BE THE RESPONSIBILITY
OF THE CITY ALONE OVERALL FOR
EVERY DOLLAR THAT THE CITY
CONTRIBUTES TO TEEF AN
ADDITIONAL EIGHTY TWO SENSES
LEVERAGE TO MAXIMIZE INVESTMENT
IN VALUE BASED INFRASTRUCTURE
AND WE BELIEVE THAT A STRONG
DOWNTOWN STRENGTHEN OUR CITY
AND REGION.
ULTIMATELY THE DEED IS A TOOL
TO ADVANCE CITY GOALS THROUGH
INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT AND
WHERE WE DO OUR WORK IS A KEY
DECISION WITH THIS NEW PLAN
TODAY THE DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
REMAIN THE SAME AS WHEN THE
DEED WAS CREATED IN NINETEEN
EIGHTY TWO THE DOLLARS
GENERATED ONLY COME FROM WITHIN
THIS BOUNDARY AND CAN ONLY BE
SPENT WITHIN THIS BOUNDARY.
AND I KNOW THAT MAURA HAS SHOWN
YOU THIS SIDE MULTIPLE TIMES
BUT WE THOUGHT IT WAS WORTH
REPEATING FOR THOSE WATCHING
AND NEW TO THIS CONTENT WE HAVE
NOT SERIOUSLY EXPLORED BOUNDARY
EXPANSION HERE IN ANN ARBOR
EVER.
IN CONTRAST, THE GRAND RAPIDS
HAS EXPANDED 16 TIMES SINCE ITS
CREATION IN NINETEEN EIGHTY TO
RESPOND TO EVOLVING NEEDS AND
THAT'S THE CONVERSATION WE WANT
TO HAVE WITH YOU TONIGHT.
CENTRAL TO THE BOUNDARY
DISCUSSION IS RECOGNIZING THAT
THE NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES
GROW AS DOWNTOWN AND
SURROUNDING AREAS EVOLVE OVER
TIME, BOUNDARY EXPANSION CAN
DIRECTLY RESPOND OPPORTUNITIES
TO MEET THOSE EVOLVING NEEDS
AND CITY GOALS WE HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO CREATE SAFE
WELCOMING GATEWAYS INTO
DOWNTOWN IN BETWEEN BUSINESS
DISTRICTS CONNECT DOWNTOWN TO
THE RIVER ADDRESS UNDERUTILIZED
AND CONTAMINATED SITES LIKE
SEVEN TWENTY ONE NORTH MAIN
SUPPORT MAINTENANCE NEEDS AND
EXPAND REINVEST IN AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
KEY AREAS INCLUDE TO THE NORTH
ALONG NORTH MAIN AND THE
DIVISION BROADWAY BRIDGE AREA
AND TO THE SOUTH ALONG THE
PACARD AND SOUTH MAIN CORRIDORS
AND SOUTH OF SOUTH UNIVERSITY.
THESE ARE AREAS WHERE
DEVELOPMENT IS ALREADY TAKING
PLACE AND WHERE THE DDA CAN
HELP MEET INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS
A RANGE OF EXPANSION AREAS WERE
CONSIDERED SHAPED AROUND THESE
POTENTIAL PROJECTS CORRIDORS
AND PARCELL BOUNDARIES.
>> THIS MAP SHOWS THE POTENTIAL
EXPANSION AREAS RELATIVE TO THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN DRAFT LAND
USE RECOMMENDATIONS.
THE BOUNDARY DOES NOT REQUIRE
OR TRIGGER A LAND-USE CHANGE
BUT ALIGNMENT PROVIDES
OPPORTUNITIES TO COORDINATE
SERVICES, CRITICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS AND
AMENITY IMPROVEMENTS IN THESE
AREAS.
NEXT WE ASSESS THE LEVEL
OF NEEDED PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
INVESTMENT BY POTENTIAL
EXPANSION AREA WHICH YOU CAN
SEE IN THE MAP HERE.
RED INDICATES THE HIGHEST LEVEL
OF IDENTIFIED INFRASTRUCTURE
INVESTMENT NEEDED AND YELLOW
THE LATEST THIS FURTHER
REINFORCED AREAS WHERE THERE'S
THE GREATEST OPPORTUNITY TO USE
THE DENHA AS A TOOL TO SUPPORT
CITY GOALS.
WITH ALL OF THIS IN MIND, THE
MAP YOU SEE ON YOUR SCREEN
SHOWS THE RECOMMENDED EXPANSION
AREA.
THIS INCLUDES TWO AREAS NORTH
OF DOWNTOWN AND THREE AREAS TO
THE SOUTH TO SUMMARIZE AND
EXPAND THE DDA BOUNDARY CREATES
AN OPPORTUNITY FOR THE DDA TO
PARTICIPATE IN NEW AREAS TO
ADDRESS EVOLVING NEEDS HELP
OFFSET PUBLIC UTILITY
PRESSURES, MAKE CONNECTIONS TO
BUSINESS DISTRICTS JUST OUTSIDE
OF OUR BOUNDARIES AND EXPAND OR
WE INVEST IN AFFORDABLE HOUSING
.
NOW I'M GOING TO TURN OVER TO
ROB TO TALK ABOUT OUR FINANCE
PLAN.
THANK YOU AMBER.
I'M GOING TO FOCUS A LITTLE BIT
ON YOUR CURRENT TIFF CAP AND
HOW THAT AFFECTS YOUR YOUR
DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
SO THIS SLIDE SHOWS A STANDARD
TIF MODEL.
THIS IS KIND OF TIFF TYPICALLY
WORKS THE THE ORANGE RECTANGLE
ON THE BOTTOM REPRESENTS THE
BASE THAT'S ESTABLISHED WHEN
THE DENHA WAS CREATED AND THE
TRIANGLE THE BLUE TRIANGLE ON
THE TOP REPRESENTS CAPTURE THAT
THE DAY WOULD CAPTURE.
SO TYPICALLY ONE HUNDRED
PERCENT OF THAT BLUE PORTION
WOULD GO TO THE DDA FOR
INFRASTRUCTURE AND OTHER
PROGRAMS.
>> MOST DAYS USE THIS MODEL BUT
OF COURSE THERE ARE SOME
EXCEPTIONS AND OF COURSE ANN
ARBOR IS ONE OF THOSE
EXCEPTIONS.
SO THIS SHOWS THE CURRENT CAP
MODEL THAT YOU USE IN ANN ARBOR
AND WHAT'S UNIQUE ABOUT THIS IS
THAT TIF IS LIMITED ON BOTH THE
BOTTOM AND THE TOP OF THE CHART
ON THE BOTTOM PER ORDINANCE THE
DDA DOES NOT CAPTURE ANY
INFLATION SO THAT'S RETAINED BY
THE TAXING AUTHORITY SUCH AS
THE CITY.
ADDITIONALLY IN TWENTY
SEVENTEEN THE FUNDING WAS
FURTHER LIMITED BY CAP AND WITH
THE CAP IN PLACE DID IT CAPTURE
IS NEARLY FLAT AND THAT'S AGAIN
BECAUSE YOU'VE GOT A LIMITATION
ON THE BOTTOM WITH INFLATION
NOT BEING CAPTURED AND THEN A
THREE AND A HALF PERCENT CAP ON
THE TOP WE ESTIMATE BY TWENTY
THIRTY THREE MORE THAN 50
PERCENT OF TIF REVENUES THAT
WOULD HAVE BEEN CAPTURED BY THE
DENHA UNDER THE STANDARD MODEL
WILL BE DISTRIBUTED TO THE
TAXING UNITS UNDER THE CURRENT
SITUATION.
SO AS AN ALTERNATIVE AS YOU
KNOW WE'VE BEEN EXPLORING THE
GRAND RAPIDS DE'S REVENUE SHARE
MODEL THEY INTRODUCED GAIN
SHARE MODEL FOLLOWING A CHANGE
OF STATE LAW A FEW YEARS AGO
THEY WORKED WITH TAXING
AUTHORITIES TO DETERMINE A
PERCENTAGE SHARE THEY BEGAN AT
10 PERCENT AS YOU CAN SEE ON
THE CHART AND THEY GRADUALLY
INCREASED TO A MAXIMUM
OF TWENTY FIVE PERCENT BY USING
A PERCENT SHARE INSTEAD OF A
CAP EVERYONE'S REVENUE GROWS
TOGETHER.
THIS MODEL MAINTAINS THE
MAJORITY OF THE AVAILABLE
FUNDING TO REINVEST IN DOWNTOWN
INFRASTRUCTURE.
SO WE ARE RECOMMENDING A SHIFT
TO THIS MODEL THIS THIS GAIN
SHARE MODEL FOR YOUR ORIGINAL
DISTRICT IN TWENTY TWENTY SIX
WE ESTIMATE THE PERCENTAGE
OF TIFE SHARED WILL APPROACH
THIRTY PERCENT UNDER THE
CURRENT THE CURRENT SETUP WE
RECOMMEND LOCKING IN THAT
THIRTY PERCENT 70 PERCENT
SPLIT.
THIS REFLECTS THE GRAND RAPIDS
APPROACH BUT USES THIRTY
PERCENT INSTEAD OF TWENTY FIVE
PERCENT TO ENSURE THAT WE'RE
NOT CAPTURING EXISTING TAXES
AND ASSURE THAT TAXING
AUTHORITIES LIKE THE CITY
OF COURSE ARE A CONTINUE
RELYING ON THE REVENUE THAT
THEY'VE BEEN ENJOYING AND AGAIN
BY MOVING TO A PERCENT SHARE
EVERYONE'S FUNDING GROWS OVER
TIME INCLUDING THE DAYS THIS
WOULD ALLOW THE D.A. TO
CONTINUE LEVERAGING DOLLARS TO
PROVIDE GREATER BENEFITS.
SO THIS CHART SHOWS THE EFFECT
OF THE THREE DIFFERENT MODELS
OVER TEN YEARS JUST USING THE
ORIGINAL DENHA DISTRICT, THE
GRAY BAR ON THE RIGHT SHOWS
THAT IF THERE WERE NO CAP TO
PLACE THE DDA WOULD CAPTURE TWO
HUNDRED AND TEN MILLION DOLLARS
OVER THAT TEN YEAR PERIOD.
THE LIGHT BLUE BAR ON THE OTHER
SIDE SHOWS THAT THE CURRENT
MODEL THE THREE AND A HALF
PERCENT CAP IF THAT WERE
RETAINED THAT THE DDA WOULD
CAPTURE ONE HUNDRED AND
SEVENTEEN MILLION DOLLARS OVER
TEN YEARS AND THEN IN THE
MIDDLE THE RECOMMENDED GAIN
SHARE MODEL WOULD RESULT IN ONE
HUNDRED AND FORTY SEVEN DOLLARS
MILLION OVER TEN YEARS.
SO YOU CAN SEE FROM THE CHART
THAT THE GAIN SHARE IS AN
INCREASE OVER THE CAP BUT IT'S
A MODERATE APPROACH IN
COMPARISON TO REMOVING THE CAP
ENTIRELY SO WITH YOU KNOW WITH
A CHANGE OBVIOUSLY WITH MORE
DOLLARS TO WORK WITH AT THE DDA
ONE OF THE BIG OPPORTUNITIES IS
THAT DOWNTOWN SERVICE TEAM IN
TALKING TO THE PUBLIC AND
TALKING TO BUSINESS OWNERS,
TALKING TO CITY STAFF, THERE
ARE A NUMBER OF ISSUES THAT
CURRENTLY LACK A CLEAR
CHAMPION.
THESE INCLUDE THINGS LIKE SNOW
REMOVAL AND OVERLOOKED AREAS
LIKE CROSSWALKS, ADA PARKING
RAMPS, LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE,
DOWNTOWN BARRICADE DEPLOYMENT
FOR STREET CLOSURES, AND HELP
OF SIDEWALK GARBAGE.
WELL, IT'S NOT THE CORE OF WHAT
THE DDA DOES THE DDA DOES SEE
VALUE IN ADDRESSING THIS WITH A
CONSISTENT REVENUE SOURCE TO
IMPLEMENT NOW SHOW PROJECTIONS
FOR AND WE DISCUSSED THE
CURRENT DISTRICT BUT AMBER
DISCUSSED THE POSSIBILITY
OF EXPANDING GEOGRAPHICALLY THE
DISTRICT SO WITH THAT IF THE
BOUNDARIES WERE TO EXPAND
OF COURSE THAT WOULD NEED A
FUNDING MODEL FOR THAT AS WELL
.
AGAIN, WE ARE PROPOSING THE
SAME GRAND RAPIDS GAIN SHARE
MODEL SINCE THESE WOULD BE NEW
AREAS TO THE DENHA AND ANY TAX
REVENUE WOULD START SMALL AND
GROW SLOWLY, WE RECOMMEND A
STEP APPROACH WHERE WE WOULD
START OUT WITH THE DENHA
CAPTURING ONE HUNDRED PERCENT
OF THE CAPTURE AND THEN AFTER
THE FIRST TEN YEARS THAT WOULD
THAT WOULD CHANGE IN YEAR 11
AND WOULD KIND OF STEP UP FROM
THERE.
>> SO KEEP IN MIND THE CITY AND
OTHER TAXING AUTHORITIES WOULD
CONTINUE TO KEEP THE
INFLATIONARY GAIN THAT YOU HAVE
IN ORDINANCE IN YOUR ORDINANCE
.
>> SO THIS CHART SHOWS THE
ESTIMATED REVENUE GAINED BY THE
FIVE AREAS THAT AMBER SHOWED
EARLIER IF THEY WERE ADDED TO
THE DENHA AND THIS IS AGAIN IS
OVER 10 YEARS AND THIS DOES
ASSUME THAT NO TAXING AUTHORITY
OFFSET WHICH WHICH IS A
POSSIBILITY.
>> SO REVENUE GENERATION ALONE
OF COURSE IS NOT THE REASON IS
NOT THE ONLY REASON FOR
EXPANSION OBVIOUSLY AS AMBER
KIND OF ALLUDED TO, IT'S
RESPONDING TO THE NEEDS OF AN
EVOLVING DOWNTOWN EXPANSION
ALLOWS THE TO LEVERAGE OVERALL
FUNDING AND MAKE IMPORTANT
INVESTMENTS IN THESE NEW AREAS
.
I DO WANT TO JUST IF YOU NOTICE
THE THE DOLLAR AMOUNT THERE,
YOU KNOW, IF ALL FIVE OF THOSE
DISTRICTS WERE ADDED THAT WOULD
RESULT WE ESTIMATE IN IN ABOUT
30 MILLION DOLLARS WORTH
OF ADDITIONAL REVENUE.
AND JUST TO GIVE YOU AN IDEA
OF HOW THAT COMPARES WITH THE
THE ORIGINAL DISTRICT IF THE
CITY WERE TO FOLLOW THE
RECOMMENDATION AND CHANGE OVER
TO THE 30 PERCENT GAIN SHARE,
THE D.A. WOULD REALIZE
SIMILARLY ANOTHER THIRTY
MILLION DOLLARS I WOULD GO FROM
ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN
DOLLARS MILLION TO ONE HUNDRED
FORTY SEVEN MILLION.
SO IT'S IT'S IT'S ACTUALLY A
SIMILAR GAIN THAN IT WOULD BE
BY EXPANDING JUST TO GIVE YOU
AN IDEA OF THE MAGNITUDE
OF EACH OF THESE DECISIONS.
>> OK, SO WITH THAT AGAIN
TRANSITIONING TO THE GRAND
RAPIDS SHARE AMOUNT GAIN SHARE
MODEL WILL EXPAND THE DDA
BENEFIT AND ALLOW MORE FUNDING
FOR PROJECTS AND PROGRAMS
INCLUDING ADDING A DOWNTOWN
SERVICE TEAM, FUNDING MORE
PROJECTS, LARGER SCALE PROJECTS
AND MAINTAINING AREAS WITHIN
THE BOUNDARY TO A HIGHER
DEGREE.
AND WITH THAT I'M GOING TO TURN
OVER TO OLIVER WHO'S GOING TO
TALK MORE ABOUT THESE PROJECTS
.
>> THANK YOU, ROB.
ALL RIGHT.
WE'LL CONTINUE ON INTO OUR LAST
COUPLE OF SECTIONS HERE SO
BUILDING ON THE FUNDING
INFORMATION THAT ROB SHARED.
WE'RE GOING TO LOOK AT A TEN
YEAR OUTLAY OF POTENTIAL
NEAR-TERM PROJECTS TO REALLY
LOOK AT HOW THOSE DECISIONS
AROUND BOUNDARY EXPANSION AND
THE FUNDING MODEL CAN IMPACT
WHAT THE DDA COULD ACCOMPLISH
RELATIVE TO THAT PROJECT LIST.
AS A REMINDER, YOU'VE BEEN
PROVIDED WITH A COMPREHENSIVE
DOCUMENT DESCRIBING A RANGE
OF POTENTIAL PROJECTS AND NEEDS
ACROSS BOTH THE DA'S EXISTING
AND EXPANDED POTENTIALLY
EXPANDED AREA.
THIS RANGE OF PROJECTS IS PART
OF THE DDA DEVELOPMENT PLAN OR
WHAT CAN BE OUTLINED IN THAT
PLAN AND WE'VE IDENTIFIED
POTENTIAL PROJECTS PULLING FROM
A RANGE OF EXISTING CITY PLANS
AND ONGOING INITIATIVES IN
TOTAL THIS IS ABOUT ONE HUNDRED
AND FIFTY PROJECTS REPRESENTING
ABOUT ONE POINT FIVE BILLION IN
POTENTIAL NEED AND CRITICALLY
JUST WANT TO POINT OUT THAT
IDENTIFYING AND EVALUATING
THESE PROJECTS WAS DONE AS PART
OF THE CITY'S CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLANNING PROCESS
USING THE SAME VALUE BASED
SCORING METHOD AS OTHER CITY
CAPITAL PROJECTS.
SO WHAT YOU SEE ON THE SCREEN
HERE IS A LIST OF POTENTIAL
PROJECTS OVER THE NEXT 10 YEARS
AND THIS IS INTENDED TO PROVIDE
A FRAMEWORK SO THAT WE CAN LOOK
AT FOR INSTANCE ON THIS LIST
WHAT RANGE OF THINGS COULD BE
ACCOMPLISHED UNDER THESE
DIFFERENT TYPES OF SCENARIOS.
THIS LIST WAS DEVELOPED AGAIN
AS AN EXAMPLE AND REALLY
REACHES ACROSS THE RANGE
OF DIFFERENT PROJECT CATEGORIES
THAT AMBER AND ROB HAD SPOKEN
TO EARLIER.
AGAIN, THE DDA PARTICIPATES THE
CITIZENSHIP PROCESS AND WE
CREATED THIS SCENARIO BY TAKING
HIGH RANKED HIGH SCORING
PROJECTS FROM ACROSS THESE
DIFFERENT PROJECT TYPES AND
SCALED IT TO A TEN YEAR PERIOD
OF TIME AND ALIGNED IT WITH
OTHER OPPORTUNITIES THAT WERE
PROGRAMED OR WHERE THERE ARE
SOME NEAR-TERM URGENCY.
THE COST IN THE TABLE IS AN
ESTIMATED TOTAL PROJECT COSTS
AND THE SCENARIOS THAT WE WALK
THROUGH WILL SHOW WHAT THE DDA
CAN CONTRIBUTE TOWARDS THAT
TOTAL POTENTIAL NEED AND COST.
AND JUST TO PROVIDE A LITTLE
BIT MORE DETAIL OF WHAT THESE
PROJECTS MIGHT ENTAIL AND THIS
GIVES A VISUAL SENSE OF THIS
OF SOME OF THE PROJECTS THAT
COULD BE INCLUDED WITHIN THIS
TEN YEAR LIST.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, LOOKING AT A
IMPROVEMENTS TO EVENT THAT ARE
USED DOWNTOWN FOR THE STREET
CLOSURES THAT COULD BE PAIRED
WITH THE SERVICE TEAM THAT ROB
SPOKE TO AND COULD BE A WAY TO
MORE EFFECTIVELY DEPLOY
BARRICADES FOR EVENTS AND
FACILITATE STREET CLOSURES,
SUPPORT FOR BUS RAPID TRANSIT
AND IMPROVEMENTS THAT ALIGN
WITH THE RIDES.
TWENTY FORTY FIVE LONG RANGE
PLAN INVESTMENTS AND MANY
OF THE DOWNTOWN PARKS AND OPEN
SPACES INCLUDING THE POTENTIAL
TO REMEDIATE SEVEN TWENTY ONE
NORTH MAIN CREEK TRAIL ACCESS
THROUGH THERE AND IMPROVE
STORMWATER CONDITIONS.
OTHER STREET PROJECTS COULD
INCLUDE PRIORITY SAFETY
CORRIDORS AND IMPROVEMENTS
ALONG THOSE LIKE WASHINGTON
STREET AND NORTH DIVISION AND
LASTLY IMPROVEMENTS IN
SUSTAINABLE ENERGY INVESTMENT
INCLUDING GEOTHERMAL
INSTALLATIONS IN THE DOWNTOWN
AREA.
ALSO WORTH MENTIONING AND
UNDERSCORING THAT ALL OF THESE
PROJECTS ARE ALSO ALIGNED WITH
UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS AND
UPGRADES.
SO WE REALLY SEE THIS PAIRING
OF PROJECTS WITH UTILITY
IMPROVEMENTS AS A CRITICAL TOOL
FOR SUPPORTING JOBS, IMPROVING
THE RESILIENCY OF DOWNTOWN AND
ACCOMMODATING MORE RESIDENTS
JOBS AND VISITORS TO THE
DOWNTOWN AREA AND TO THE CITY
AS A WHOLE.
AND THEN LASTLY, THE DDA HAS AN
ONGOING COMMITMENT TO
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND THIS IS
REFLECTED IN THIS PROJECT LIST
AS WELL, PRINCIPALLY THE DAY.
THIS IS AN IMPORTANT
DISTINCTION HAS TWO WAYS
OF SUPPORTING AFFORDABLE
HOUSING BOTH THROUGH
INFRASTRUCTURE WORK THAT
DIRECTLY OFFSETS COST AT AN
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECT
MIGHT OTHERWISE HAVE TO TAKE ON
UTILITY UPGRADES, THINGS LIKE
THAT AND THEN ALSO TO DAYS LONG
STANDING COMMITMENT TO THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND AND
GRANT PROGRAM.
AND IN ADDITION THERE'S ONGOING
GEOTHERMAL STUDIES THAT ARE
UNDERWAY IN THE CITY AND
LOOKING FOR OPPORTUNITIES TO
PAIR SOME OF THOSE GEOTHERMAL
ENERGY PROJECTS IN ALIGNING
THOSE WITH HOUSING COMMISSION
PROPERTIES AND PUBLIC SITES FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING WILL BE A
KEY STRATEGY AS WELL.
SO LOOKING ACROSS THESE
NEAR-TERM PROJECTS, YOU KNOW
THE D.A. IS PREPARED TO EXPAND
OR CONTRACT OUR ACTIVITIES OVER
TIME DEPENDING ON DIRECTION
FROM COUNCIL
IF DENHA FUNDS
REMAIN RESTRICTED, THEY'LL NEED
TO CONTRACT THEIR SCOPE
OF ACTIVITIES OVER TIME WHICH
LIKELY MEANS ONLY FOCUSING ON
THE KINDS OF PROJECTS THAT
MIGHT NOT HAPPEN AT ALL WITHOUT
DDA FUNDING ON THE OTHER HAND,
IF FUNDS INCREASE, TIF CAN
REALLY CONTINUE TO BE USED AS A
TOOL TO SUPPORT PROJECTS.
FOR INSTANCE, THOSE MIGHT BE
THREATENED BY FEDERAL FUNDING
ADDITIONAL SUPPORT FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
INFRASTRUCTURE TRANSIT
IMPROVEMENTS, SUSTAINABLE
ENERGY AND NON MOTORIZED
PROJECTS.
SO THOSE ARE ALL REFLECTED IN
THAT 10 YEAR LIST.
OK, SO BEFORE DIVING INTO THE
SCENARIOS AND LOOKING AT HOW
ALL THOSE THINGS TO COME
TOGETHER WE JUST WANTED TO SHOW
SOME OF THE REVENUE PROJECTIONS
AND HOW THOSE RELATE TO TO THE
DIFFERENT SCENARIOS.
SO WE'VE COMBINED THE THREE KEY
DECISIONS AROUND BOUNDARY
FUNDING AND PROJECTS INTO
SCENARIOS TO HELP ILLUSTRATE
HOW DIFFERENT COMBINATIONS
OF REVENUE AND BOUNDARY
EXPANSION IMPACT THE CAPACITY.
THE PACKET THAT YOU ARE ALL
PROVIDED WITH CONTAINED A LOT
OF THESE DETAILED ASSUMPTIONS
ABOUT THE PROJECTIONS THAT ROB
HAD SPOKEN TO.
WE JUST WANTED TO CALL
ATTENTION TO A FEW KEY AREAS AS
WE'RE THINKING ABOUT THIS AND
THINKING ABOUT THE SCENARIOS
FIRST FOR THE ORIGINAL DISTRICT
WE'RE ASSUMING THAT A HISTORIC
GROWTH RATE OF ABOUT NINE
PERCENT WILL CONTINUE OVER THE
NEXT TEN YEAR PERIOD OF TIME
FOR THE EXPANDED AREAS WE USE
TWO DIFFERENT RATES DEPENDING
ON THE AREAS SOUTH OF DOWNTOWN
OR WE'RE SEEING A LOT MORE
INTENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT
HAPPENING.
A GROWTH RATE OF NINE PERCENT
WAS USED FOR THAT AREA AND THEN
NORTH OF DOWNTOWN A MORE MODEST
GROWTH RATE OF ABOUT THREE AND
A HALF PERCENT WAS USED WHICH
IS MORE IN ALIGNMENT WITH THE
HISTORIC PACE OF CHANGE IN THAT
AREA ON THE NORTH SIDE OF TOWN
.
AND THEN AGAIN THESE ARE THE
CHARTS THAT ROB SPOKEN TO
EARLIER.
BUT JUST A REMINDER THAT THE
SAME TEN YEAR REVENUE
PROJECTIONS ARE USED IN THESE
SCENARIOS BOTH THE ORIGINAL
DISTRICT COMPARING THE
CONDITION TODAY WITH THE CAP IN
PLACE VERSUS THE GAIN SHARE
MODEL AND THEN FOR THE
POTENTIAL EXPANDED AREAS AND
THAT THOSE REVENUE TARGETS BY
EACH DIFFERENT EXPANSION AREA
LAST SECTION WE'RE GETTING
THERE SO WE'RE GOING TO LOOK AT
HOW THESE ALL COME TOGETHER
MORE.
I HAD SHARED THIS SLIDE EARLIER
AND ULTIMATELY YOU ALL HAVE TO
KIND OF KEY DECISIONS BEFORE
YOU THAT WE WANT YOUR FEEDBACK
ON ARE WE GOING TO IMPLEMENT A
GAIN SHARE MODEL OR NOT AND
MAKE THAT TRANSITION AND THEN
QUESTIONS AROUND EXPANDING THE
DDA BOUNDARY OR NOT AND THOSE
KIND OF YES NO QUESTIONS LEAD
TO FOUR DIFFERENT SCENARIOS AND
WE'RE GOING TO WALK THROUGH
EACH OF THOSE.
SO FIRST TWO SCENARIOS AND BE
KEEPS THE DENHA BOUNDARY AS IT
IS TODAY AND THEN EXPLORES THE
IMPACT OF SWITCHING TO THE GAIN
SHARE MODEL WITHIN THE ORIGINAL
DENHA DISTRICT OR KEEPING THE
CURRENT FUNDING CAP IN PLACE.
AND SO SCENARIO A THIS REFLECTS
THE STATUS QUO WHERE WE ARE
TODAY STICKING WITH THE
EXISTING BOUNDARY AND KEEPING
THE CAP IN PLACE AND THE
PROJECT LIST ON THE LEFT YOU
CAN SEE SOME OF THOSE PROJECTS
ARE GREAT OUT AND IT'S JUST
HIGHLIGHTING THE PROJECTS THAT
FALL WITHIN THE EXISTING
BOUNDARY TODAY.
SO SOME OF THOSE PROJECTS ARE
DROPPING OFF AND THIS ENDS UP
TOTALING ABOUT NINETY EIGHT
MILLION DOLLARS IN POTENTIAL
NEED.
WE FOUND TO BE HELPFUL TO THINK
OF THIS TEN YEAR PLAN IN TERMS
OF YEARLY AVERAGES AS WELL AS
IF YOU LOOK AT THE CHARTS ON
THE RIGHT FOR THE PROJECTS
WITHIN THE DDA DISTRICT THE
AVERAGE ANNUAL IDENTIFIED NEED
IS ABOUT TEN MILLION A YEAR IN
SPENDING TO GET THROUGH THOSE
PROJECTS COMPARED TO ABOUT SIX
MILLION AVAILABLE AND FUNDING
FOR EACH YEAR.
AND SO ULTIMATELY TO ADVANCE
THIS WORK IT MEANS THAT THE
PROJECT SCOPE'S EITHER NEED TO
COME DOWN OR SOME PROJECTS NEED
TO FALL OFF THE LIST AND BE
LEFT UNDONE OR OTHER
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES AND UNITS
WOULD HAVE TO PARTICIPATE TO
HELP GET THAT WORK ACCOMPLISHED
AND THEN WITH RESPECT TO THE
SERVICE TEAM UNDER SCENARIO A,
THE SERVICE TEAM IS NOT FUNDED
IN THIS SCENARIO WITH THE DA'S
FOCUS ON CAPITAL INFRASTRUCTURE
AND A LIMIT TO THEIR TOTAL
FUNDING AVAILABLE, IT DOESN'T
REALLY ALLOW FOR A SERVICE TEAM
.
HOWEVER, SUPPORT FOR THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING GRANT
PROGRAM WOULD CONTINUE AND THIS
IS REFLECTED BOTH THROUGH
CAPITAL PROJECTS THAT ARE THAT
ARE IDENTIFIED AND THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND GRANTS
.
SO SCENARIO B LOOKS AT THAT
SAME LIST OF SCENARIOS OR
PROJECTS THAT ARE JUST WITHIN
THE DDA BOUNDARY AS IT IS TODAY
BUT THEN LOOKS AT WHAT CAN BE
ACCOMPLISHED WITH THE GAIN
SHARE MODEL IN PLACE.
SO THIS APPROACH PROVIDES MORE
FUNDING ABOUT NINE MILLION
ANNUALLY RELATIVE TO THAT TEN
MILLION AND NEED IN OTHER WORDS
THE DDA CAN ACCOMPLISH MORE
OF THESE MORE OF THESE PROJECTS
OR CONTRIBUTE A GREATER AMOUNT
TOWARDS THAT.
NINETY EIGHT MILLION IN TOTAL
NEED AND WITH THIS SHIFT IT
WOULD PROVIDE FUNDING FOR A
DOWNTOWN SERVICE TEAM TO BE
IMPLEMENTED AND THE AMOUNT
OF FUNDING GOING TO THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND WOULD
BE INCREASED.
SO NOW FOR SCENARIO C AND D
SIMILAR APPROACH BUT THIS IS
NOW LOOKING AT THE AREAS WHERE
THE BOUNDARY IS EXPANDED AND
THAT MIX IS INCLUDED AND THEN
LOOKING AT WHETHER AGAIN GAIN
SHARE MODELS ARE INCLUDED IN
THAT OR NOT.
SO WITH AN EXPANDED BOUNDARY
YOU CAN SEE ALL OF THE PROJECTS
IN THAT POTENTIAL 10 YEAR
PROJECT LIST ARE NOW INCLUDED.
THAT'S ABOUT ONE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY MILLION AND IDENTIFIED
NEED AND FROM AN ANNUAL AVERAGE
BASIS AGAIN SCENARIO DOES NOT
SWITCH TO THE GAIN SHARE MODEL.
IT KEEPS THE CAP IN PLACE.
THIS IS NOW ABOUT FIFTEEN
MILLION ANNUALLY AND DENSIFIED
NEED VERSUS TEN MILLION IN
FUNDING THROUGH THE DAY.
THAT WOULD LEAVE A BIT FOR
OTHER ENTITIES THAT WOULD HAVE
TO HAVE TO PICK UP THAT
DIFFERENCE OR THE WORK WOULD BE
LEFT UNDONE AND WITH THE
SIMILAR SCENARIO A WITH THE
TIFE CAP REMAINING IN PLACE AND
FUNDS RESTRICTED RELATIVE TO
THE AMOUNT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
DDA WOULD STAY FOCUSED ON
CAPITAL PROJECTS AND WOULD NOT
PURSUE IMPLEMENTATION OF A
SERVICE TEAM.
BUT IT DOES PROVIDE SLIGHTLY
MORE REVENUE FOR HOUSING
SIMILAR TO SCENARIO B FOR THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND AND
THEN LAST SCENARIO D THIS IS
USING BOTH AGAINST YOUR
APPROACH AND EXPANDED CITY
BOUNDARY AGAIN SAME LIST
OF POTENTIAL PROJECTS BUT THIS
IS GENERATING ABOUT TWELVE
MILLION ANNUALLY COMPARED TO
FIFTEEN MILLION AN IDENTIFIED
PROJECT NEED DOES PROVIDE
FUNDING FOR A DOWNTOWN SERVICE
TEAM AND THE MODELING ALSO
LOOKED AT STARTING TO EXPAND
THAT SERVICE TEAM EVEN INTO THE
EXPANDED AREAS WITHIN THAT TEN
YEAR PERIOD OF TIME AND THEN
FUND THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
FUND AT THE HIGHEST LEVEL
ACROSS ANY OF THE SCENARIOS.
ULTIMATELY THIS WAS THE
APPROACH THAT WAS RECOMMENDED
BASED ON ALLOWING KIND OF THE
MOST THE GREATEST LEVERAGING
DOLLARS TO REALLY ADDRESS THE
AREAS THAT ARE IN NEED IN THE
EVOLVING DOWNTOWN.
JUST A COUPLE LAST SLIDES AS WE
WRAP UP TO JUST LOOK ACROSS
THESE SCENARIOS.
THE SLIDE COMPARES THE TOTAL
OF THE TEN YEAR FUNDING
AVAILABLE UNDER EACH OF THOSE
SCENARIOS VERSUS THAT
BACKGROUND OF ABOUT ONE HUNDRED
AND FIFTY MILLION AND PROJECT
NEEDS SCENARIOS ON THE FAR LEFT
THAT AGAIN REFLECTS KIND
OF WHAT'S IN PLACE TODAY WHICH
LEAVES A SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT
OF POTENTIAL NEED UNMET AND
THEN SCENARIO D AND THE FAR
RIGHT PROVIDES THE MOST FUNDING
AVAILABLE TOWARDS IMPLEMENTING
OUR VALUE BASED CAPITAL
PROJECTS.
>> AND THEN LASTLY KIND
OF LOOKING AT SOME OF THE
PROGRAMMING'S SIDE OF THINGS
THIS SIDE SHOWS THE PROGRAMING
OUTCOMES.
SO UNDER SCENARIO A PROVIDES
THE LEAST AMOUNT OF FUNDING FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
SCENARIO D CAN PROVIDE THE MOST
.
AND THEN WITH RESPECT TO THE
SERVICE TEAM, BOTH SCENARIOS B
AND D WOULD ALLOW FOR FUNDING
OF THE SERVICE TEAM OVER THIS
TEN YEAR PERIOD OF TIME.
SO BEFORE WE CLOSE JUST A QUICK
REMINDER ON PROCESS THE TEAM IS
WORKING TO DELIVER A PLAN FOR
YOUR CONSIDERATION ON AUGUST
18TH.
AS MARA MENTIONED BETWEEN NOW
AND THEN WE DO NEED TO
UNDERSTAND YOUR INPUT AND YOUR
THOUGHTS ON THESE TWO KEY
QUESTIONS BECAUSE THAT WILL
ULTIMATELY BE PART OF SHAPING
THE PLAN IN THE FINAL
RECOMMENDATION THAT GOES INTO
THAT.
SO WE'LL END WITH KIND OF WHERE
WE STARTED LOOKING AT THE
CAPACITY FOR THE DAY TO
IMPLEMENT VALUE BASED PROJECTS
IN ALIGNMENT WITH THE CITY'S
GOALS AS A FUNCTION OF BOTH THE
BOUNDARY WHICH DETERMINES WHERE
THE DEA CAN OPERATE AND ITS
FUNDING MODEL.
SO YOU ALL HAVE TO KIND OF KEY
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER BEFORE
YOU TODAY.
SCENARIO D THE RECOMMENDED
APPROACH BASED ON BEST MEETING
THE NEEDS AND PRIORITIES
IDENTIFIED THROUGHOUT THE
PLANNING PROCESS.
IT ALLOWS THE DDA TO BEST
RESPOND TO AN ALREADY EVOLVING
AND CHANGING DOWNTOWN IN AN
ENVIRONMENT THAT'S CHANGING
OUTSIDE OF THE TRADITIONAL
BOUNDARY AND IT WOULD ALLOW US
TO BEST LEVERAGE FUNDING TO
SUPPORT CRITICAL PROJECTS AND
PROGRAMS.
SO THESE ARE IMPORTANT
QUESTIONS.
>> LOOK FORWARD TO DISCUSSION
AND THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
ALL RIGHT.
YOU CAN LEAVE THAT UP.
SO WITH THAT I GUESS I DON'T
KNOW WHAT THE PROTOCOL IS BUT
OPEN IT UP TO QUESTIONS OR
HOWEVER I'LL HELP FIELD THOSE.
>> GREAT.
SO THANK YOU SO VERY MUCH
OF THEIR QUESTIONS FROM COUNCIL
ON.
THANK YOU A LOT.
THAT'S REALLY POSITIVE IN HERE.
AN EXCITING MY QUESTION IS
REGARDING THE SERVICE TEAM AND
I HAVE HAD AN INITIAL
DISCUSSION WITH ADMINISTRATOR
TONY ABOUT THIS BUT IS THAT AS
IT'S CURRENTLY ENVISIONED OR
THOSE ARE THOSE UNION
REPRESENTED JOBS AND IF SO,
WHICH UNION?
>> YEAH, NO, THAT'S A GREAT
QUESTION
.
SO OF COURSE IF WE WERE TO
CREATE OR ESTABLISH A SERVICE
TEAM WE WOULD HAVE TO PUT IN
RFP OUT SO I DON'T HAVE A
CONFIRMED ANSWER.
HOWEVER, I CAN TELL YOU THAT
WITH THE RESEARCH WE'VE DONE WE
TALKED WITH THE LARGEST
PROVIDER OF THESE SERVICES IN
THE COUNTRY BLOCK BY BLOCK THEY
PROVIDE THESE SERVICES IN OVER
ONE HUNDRED COMMUNITIES ACROSS
THE COUNTRY.
THEY DO HAVE A HANDFUL
OF COMMUNITIES THAT DO HAVE
UNIONS EMPLOYEES AND IN
SPEAKING WITH THEM IT JUST
DEPENDS IT DEPENDS ON THE
COMMUNITY.
SO I KNOW BOSTON, PITTSBURGH,
DC HAPPENED TO BE UNION DETROIT
KALAMAZOO GRAND RAPIDS ARE NOT
UNIONIZED IN THE INFORMATION
THEY SHARE.
THEY DO OFFER REALLY
COMPETITIVE WAGES.
THEY HAVE REALLY GOOD BENEFITS.
THEY INVEST IN THEIR EMPLOYEES
IN TRAINING AND THEY HAVE A
COMMITMENT TO REALLY HIRING
FROM WITHIN.
THEY TALKED ABOUT SOME OF THEIR
HIGHEST LEVEL EMPLOYEES RIGHT
NOW ACTUALLY STARTED OUT ENTRY
LEVEL SO I THINK IT WOULD
DEPEND ON WHO WE WHO WE ENDED
UP GOING WITH THE UNIONS THAT
ARE THE BLOCK BY BLOCK
EMPLOYEES ARE REPRESENTED BY
OUR THE TEAMSTERS AND I WANT TO
SAY SEIU YEAH.
THOSE TWO UNIONS OK, WELL I
WOULD HAVE A BIG CONCERN ABOUT
THIS IF IF IT WERE WHEN IT WAS
ALL SAID AND DONE THE
RECOMMENDATION WAS NOT TO HAVE
UNION REPRESENTED WORKERS.
I MEAN THIS IS THE TYPE OF WORK
THAT WE HAVE CITY EMPLOYEES DO
WHO ARE REPRESENTED BY ASK ME
AND TO ME IF IF WE WERE TO
CONTRACT THIS OUT IT WOULD LOOK
LIKE OUTSOURCING TO ME AND I
JUST WOULDN'T SUPPORT IT.
>> SO I'M JUST PUTTING THAT ON
THE RECORD.
YEAH.
AND WE CERTAINLY HAVE MORE
RESEARCH TO DO.
THIS WAS AN EXPLORATION FOR US.
WE THINK THAT IT'S SOMETHING
THAT COULD REALLY BENEFIT THE
DOWNTOWN AND WHAT I'M SHARING
IT KIND OF YES.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
>> I'M TOTALLY ON BOARD WITH
THE CONCEPT.
JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT IF
WE'RE CREATING NEW JOBS HERE
THAT THEY'RE GOOD, WELL-PAYING
UNION JOBS.
>> THANKS FOR THE QUESTIONS,
COUNCILOR WHARTON, THE ONE
MILLION ASSOCIATED WITH OR LIKE
BUDGETED FOR THE SERVICE TEAM
IS THAT JUST STAFFING?
>> IS THERE EQUIPMENT
ASSOCIATED WITH THAT GIVE AN
IDEA OF THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE OR
YOU KNOW HOW ONE MILLION I CAN
DO THAT AND I KNOW THIS IS ALL
VERY, VERY UM SO THE MODEL THAT
WE'VE LOOKED AT AND DISCUSSED
IT'S A COMPREHENSIVE IT'S A
TURNKEY SOLUTION.
SO THEY COME IN WITH EVERYTHING
FOR THE ESTIMATE WE GOT I
BELIEVE IT'S ABOUT EIGHT
EMPLOYEES.
SOME OF THOSE ARE SEASONAL.
THERE IS A MANAGER THE
EQUIPMENT THERE ARE DIFFERENT
OPTIONS.
COMMUNITY CAN LEASE EQUIPMENT
OR BUY EQUIPMENT.
I THINK MOST COMMUNITIES JUST
LEASE IT AND THEN YOU DON'T
HAVE THE HEADACHE
OF MAINTAINING THAT EQUIPMENT.
WHAT DID YOU ASK ME SOMETHING
ELSE?
OK, NO THANK YOU THAT ANSWERED
YOU KNOW, JUST YEAH.
HOW THAT ONE MILLION DOLLARS
ARE FACTORED IN THE BUDGET
THERE AND I GUESS THE EMPLOYEES
AND THE LEASE RIGHT.
MOST YEAH.
AND THAT OF COURSE YOU KNOW
WITH EMPLOYEES THEIR SALARIES
IT'S THEIR BENEFITS IT'S YEAH.
COUNSELOR RACKMAN THANKS FOR
THE PRESENTATION.
I'M ALWAYS SO IMPRESSED
ESPECIALLY WHEN I SEE THE
BEFORE AND AFTER PICTURES
OF SOME OF THE PROJECTS YOU
GUYS HAVE DONE LIKE IN THE
FARMERS MARKET AND MY BLANK
SLATE AND YOU CAN TELL EVERY
TIME YOU GO DOWN THERE WHAT A
POSITIVE CHANGE IT SAID SO I'M
VERY SUPPORTIVE OF THE DAY'S
WORK.
>> I AM WONDERING HOW YOU
EXPLORED THE EXPANDED
BOUNDARIES LIKE HOW DID YOU
DRAW THOSE LINES AND PICK THE
AREAS AND WAS THERE ENGAGEMENT
WITH BUSINESSES AND THOSE AREAS
AND KIND OF WHAT DID THAT LOOK
LIKE TO KNOW FOR SURE?
>> SO THERE'S BEEN QUITE A BIT
OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT AND
OUTREACH THAT HAS BEEN DONE AS
PART OF THIS PROCESS OVER THE
LAST 18 MONTHS.
SOME OF THE ACTIVITIES AND
QUESTIONS THAT WE'VE BEEN
COMING TO THE PUBLIC WITH HAVE
BEEN QUESTIONS AROUND, YOU
KNOW, WHERE DO YOU THINK THERE
NEEDS TO BE MORE MORE SERVICE
OR MORE ACTIVITIES OR MORE
SUPPORT TO MAKE DOWNTOWN IN THE
SURROUNDING AREA VIBRANT AND
THRIVING.
SO MANY OF THOSE AREAS TIED
INTO THAT ALSO FROM JUST AN
INFRASTRUCTURE STANDPOINT, A
LOT OF THE ONGOING PLANNING
WORK FOR INSTANCE WITH THE
DOWNTOWN AREA CIRCULATION STUDY
THAT'S LOOKING AT WHERE THERE'S
SOME REALLY KIND OF CRITICAL
CORRIDORS TO ADDRESS FROM A
TRANSPORTATION STANDPOINT, FROM
A SAFETY AND COMFORT STANDPOINT
.
A LOT OF THOSE PROJECTS KIND
OF STRADDLE PARTLY IN THE DAY
AND THEN EXTEND OUT BEYOND THE
DAY BOUNDARIES TODAY.
SO THAT COMBINATION OF PUBLIC
INPUT WHERE WE'RE SEEING
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY HAPPENING
FOR INSTANCE, THE AREA SOUTH
OF SOUTH UNIVERSITY, THAT
DISTRICT THERE'S A LOT
OF DEVELOPMENT THAT'S BEEN
APPROVED THAT'S OCCURRING IN
THAT AREA AND THE TRADITIONAL
DDA MECHANISMS ARE TAKING CARE
OF THE STREETSCAPE ENVIRONMENT
WHEN YOU HAVE THAT LEVEL AND
INTENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT
DOESN'T EXIST IN THAT AREA AND
SO IT'S ALSO RESPONDING TO KIND
OF NEED FOR WHERE WE'RE SEEING
THOSE LAND USE IS ALREADY
STARTING TO CHANGE AND WHERE
THE DDA CAN PROVIDE SERVICES
AND INFRASTRUCTURE TO SUPPORT
THAT CHANGE.
SO IT'S REALLY I WAS LOOKING AT
ALL OF THOSE AND WE KIND
OF BROKE THE AREAS UP INTO
ROUGHLY SIMILAR SIZED CHUNKS,
IF YOU WILL, AND ALSO LINE
THOSE AREAS WITH WHERE THERE
WAS SOME CONTINUITY AND LOGIC
TO THE PROJECTS THAT WERE BEING
PROPOSED TO THAT BIG LONG LIST
OF PROJECTS IN THE DEVELOPMENT
PLAN.
>> THANK YOU.
YEAH.
SO BRITISH I WANTED TO THIS MAY
BE A COMMENT LAST QUESTION AND
A COMMENT ALONG THE SAME LINES
COUNCIL MEMBER ACKMANN HAS JUST
MENTIONED IN TERMS OF THE NEW
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
WE ARE IN A PLACE WHERE WE RISK
HAVING THE THINGS THAT WE WOULD
LIKE TO SEE HAPPEN THROUGH A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN B LIMITED BY
THE EXISTING INFRASTRUCTURE.
AND SO THIS AN EXPANSION OF THE
DDA I THINK WOULD BE AN
EXTREMELY HELPFUL PARTNERSHIP
FOR THE CITY THAT COULD MOVE
THAT PLAN FORWARD FASTER INTO
IMPLEMENTATION BECAUSE
OTHERWISE I THINK THAT THE
FUNDS THERE WOULD BE DRIVEN BY
WHAT PROJECTS CAME IN AND SO
YOU CAN'T BE SYSTEMATIC AND YOU
HAVE TO WAIT UNTIL PEOPLE COME
AND ARE WILLING TO THROW YOU
ANOTHER HUNDRED FEET OF SEWER.
I HAVE ABSOLUTELY NO IDEA HOW
MANY FEET HAPPENED BUT YEAH.
SO I DON'T KNOW IF YOU
OBVIOUSLY YOU'VE THOUGHT ABOUT
THAT AND I DON'T KNOW IF THAT
ELICITS ANYTHING YOU WANT TO
ADD.
>> YEAH I DON'T HAVE ANYTHING
TO ADD TO THAT.
YEAH GOOD GOOD OBSERVATION.
COUNCIL MEMBER MALIK I GUESS I
HAVE TWO QUESTIONS TONIGHT AND
I WANT TO THANK YOU FIRST FOR
THIS PRESENTATION.
IT WAS VERY WELL DONE.
>> MY FIRST QUESTION IS I
ASSUME ALL THE ASSUMPTIONS YOU
SHARED WITH US ARE ASSUME ALL
THE OTHER TAXING AUTHORITIES
OPT IN, IS THAT CORRECT?
CORRECT.
SO MY QUESTION IS HAVE THERE
BEEN ANY CONVERSATIONS WITH ANY
OF THESE OTHER TAXING
AUTHORITIES?
I ASSUME YOU PROBABLY NEED
DIRECTION FROM THE CITY FIRST.
SO IT'S UNDERSTANDABLE THAT
THERE HAVE NOT BEEN BUT JUST
CURIOUS IF ANY OF THOSE
CONVERSATIONS HAVE TAKEN PLACE.
>> YEAH, I THINK SOME OF THOSE
CONVERSATIONS HAVE JUST STARTED
VERY, VERY RECENTLY AND YOU'RE
ABSOLUTELY CORRECT THAT YOU
KNOW, WE WANTED TO GET A SENSE
OF DIRECTION FROM COUNCIL ON
HOW WE SHOULD BE MOVING BEFORE
WE CAN ADVANCE AT THOSE
CONVERSATIONS IN A TANGIBLE
WAY.
BUT YES, IN RESPONSE TO YOUR
FIRST QUESTION, YOU KNOW THAT
THOSE ASSUMPTIONS DO ASSUME
THAT THE OTHER TAXING
AUTHORITIES WOULD PARTICIPATE
SO GREAT.
>> THANK YOU.
IN MY SECOND QUESTION IS
RELATED TO THE EXPANDED AREA
AND YOU'VE RECOMMENDED GAIN
SHARE FOR IT.
IS IT MY UNDERSTANDING THAT
THAT WOULD BE CAPPED TO TWENTY
FIVE PERCENT AS OPPOSED TO THE
THIRTY PERCENT FOR THE ORIGINAL
AREA?
WHY IS THERE THAT DISCREPANCY
OF TWENTY FIVE VERSUS THIRTY
PERCENT.
>> YEAH SO JUST IN JUST TO KIND
OF STEP BACK TO THE FIRST TEN
YEAR PERIOD WOULD BE ONE
HUNDRED PERCENT OF THE TAX
INCREMENT WOULD GO TO THE DDA
THAT GENERALLY IS GOING TO
START OFF VERY SMALL BECAUSE
YOU'RE ESTABLISHING A BASELINE
OF WHERE IT IS TODAY AND THEN
IT WOULD STEP UP TO TWENTY FIVE
PERCENT.
I THINK THAT THAT PERCENTAGE IS
AS A QUESTION OF WHERE IT
SHOULD BE.
I THINK THAT'S A THAT'S A
POLICY DECISION TO DECIDE WHAT
LEVEL THAT MIGHT WANT TO BE AT
.
TWENTY FIVE PERCENT WAS
CONSISTENT WITH THE GAIN SHARE
MODEL THAT GRAND RAPIDS PUT IN
PLACE IN COMPARISON THE
EXISTING DDA BOUNDARY YOU'RE
ALREADY ABOVE TWENTY FIVE
PERCENT OR LITTLE BELOW THIRTY.
SO HE SAID LET'S LOCK THAT IN
AND NOT PULL THAT BACK DOWN
MORE.
BUT THE TWENTY FIVE PERCENT WE
USE JUST FOR COMPARISON AND
RELATIVE TO WHAT GRAND RAPIDS
I'VE BEEN PUTTING IN PLACE FOR
THEIR STEP APPROACH GREAT THANK
YOU COUNCILOR QUINNELL.
>> WELL I JOIN MY COLLEAGUES IN
SAYING THANK YOU FOR THE
EXCELLENT PRESENTATION AND I'M
USUALLY VERY ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT
THE DAY THE WORK THAT YOU DO
AND THIS IS NO EXCEPTION.
I THINK WHAT YOU'VE PRESENTED
TO US IS REALLY EXCITING AND
WE'LL ADVANCE A LOT OF OUR
GOALS.
MY QUESTION WAS AROUND THE
DOWNTOWN SERVICE BEING PART
OF THE MAIN STREET AREA
ASSOCIATION BOTH AS A BUSINESS
OPERATOR AND AS A BOARD MEMBER,
A LOT OF THE THINGS THAT YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT ADDRESSING OUR
BIG CONCERNS
DOWNTOWN THAT WE
ALWAYS YOU KNOW, WE'VE GOT
BUSINESS OWNERS WHO ARE HOSING
DOWN THE ALLEY AND PICKING UP
TRASH AND TAKING CARE OF A LOT
OF THE THINGS THAT YOU ARE
TALKING ABOUT DOING WHICH I
THINK IS EXCITING AND FREEZE
THEM UP TO FOCUS BACK UP ON
THEIR BUSINESS AND SHOWS THAT
WE HAVE A CUSTOMER SERVICE
APPROACH TO BUSINESS IN THE
CITY WHICH I THINK IS GREAT BUT
I'M MAKING ASSUMPTIONS THAT THE
BUSINESS COMMUNITY DOWNTOWN IS
ENGAGED AND HELPED TO INFORM
SOME OF THESE GOALS AND THE
NEED.
>> SO I COULD YOU SPEAK TO THAT
JUST A LITTLE BIT PLEASE?
YEAH, ABSOLUTELY.
>> WE HAD MULTIPLE MEETINGS
OVER THE COURSE OF THIS
PLANNING PHASE WITH EACH OF THE
DOWNTOWN BUSINESS AREA
ASSOCIATION.
YOU KNOW, WE INCLUDED AS PART
OF THE BIGGER PUBLIC WORKSHOPS
WE INVITED THE ASSOCIATIONS IN
SEPARATELY TO COME DOWN AND
TALK WITH US AND JUST SHARE
INSIGHT ABOUT WHAT SOME OF THE
CHALLENGES WERE THAT THEY WERE
FACING, WHAT SOME OF THE ISSUES
WERE FOR MAIN STREET
UNDERSTANDING THE ACTIVITIES
OF WHAT THE BOARD IS DOING
DOWNTOWN AND WHERE THERE'S GAPS
AND THEIR ABILITY TO PROVIDE
SERVICE.
FOR INSTANCE, YOU KNOW, TALKING
TO STATE STREET WE HEARD THAT,
YOU KNOW, MOST OF THEIR BUDGET
IS USED TAKING CARE OF ROUTINE
KIND OF MAINTENANCE THINGS WHEN
THEY WOULD REALLY LOVE TO BE
DOING MORE EVENT PROGRAMING AND
SUPPORTING THOSE KINDS
OF THINGS THAT CAN HELP
ENERGIZE DOWNTOWN AND BRING
MORE PEOPLE INTO THE CITY.
SO THAT'S THOSE CONVERSATIONS
VERY CLOSELY INFORM THE KINDS
OF THINGS THAT THE SERVICE TEAM
WOULD BE TEED UP TO TO DO SO.
>> OK, THANK YOU.
>> THAT'S THAT'S REALLY GREAT
TO HEAR AND I THINK IT'S
IMPORTANT FOR THE PUBLIC TO
HEAR THAT TOO.
>> I KIND OF KNEW THE ANSWER TO
THAT QUESTION BUT THEY DO HAVE
A QUESTION ABOUT THE BARRICADE
DEPLOYMENT AND HOW FOR LIKE THE
SEASONAL STREET CLOSURES I
ASSUME THAT THIS THE BARRICADE
PLACEMENT IS ALL INCLUSIVE WHEN
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT FREEING UP
BUDGET FROM THESE ORGANIZATIONS
TO ACCOMPLISH OTHER THINGS LIKE
ACTIVATIONS.
>> YEAH, THAT'S RIGHT.
YEAH, EXACTLY.
SO THERE'S I THINK TWO PARTS
OF THE BARRICADE PIECE TOO.
THERE'S THE DEPLOYMENT AND
MANAGEMENT OF IT AND THAT'S A
ROLE THAT THE SERVICE TEAM
COULD HELP PROVIDE, YOU KNOW,
DEPLOYMENT OF BARRICADES AND
THEN ONE OF THE TEN YEAR KIND
OF CAPITAL PROJECT
OPPORTUNITIES IS ACTUALLY DOING
SOME PERMANENT INFRASTRUCTURE
FOR REMOVABLE OR RETRACTABLE
BOLLARDS AND KIND HIGH
FREQUENTLY CLOSED STREET AREAS
THAT WOULD MAKE THAT EVEN
EASIER TO MANAGE AND
FACILITATE.
SO TWO DIFFERENT KIND
OF APPROACHES THAT WOULD WORK
TOGETHER TO HELP SMOOTH THAT
OUT AND AGAIN TAKE THE PRESSURE
OFF OF THE BUSINESS
ASSOCIATIONS TO HAVE TO BE
MANAGING BARRICADES FOR ALL
OF THEIR CLOSURES AND THEY CAN
FOCUS ON THE FUN STUFF THAT'S
REALLY EXCITING AND I THINK
THAT'S WHAT WE NEED FOR A
VIBRANT DOWNTOWN.
>> SO YEAH, GREAT CALCIO
RACKMAN AS I LOOK AT THE
EXPANSION THAT'S ON NORTH MAIN
STREET AND THE PROJECT THAT'S
LISTED THERE WHICH I THINK IT'S
THE NORTH MAIN STREETSCAPE, I'M
WONDERING HOW OR WHETHER THAT
INTERSECTS WITH THE TRUNK LINE
STUDY AND POTENTIALLY TAKING
OVER HOW MUCH OF THAT IS THE
TRUNK LINE VERSUS NINE?
>> YEAH YEAH THAT SO THE TRUNK
LINE AND ITS TRUNK LINE STARTS
NORTH MAIN IN HERE ON AND RUNS
ALL THE WAY NORTH TO TWENTY
THREE SO THAT WOULD BE
COINCIDENT WITH THAT SECTION
OF NORTH MEAN FROM HERE ON
STRAIGHT DOWNTOWN NORTH LIKE
THE BOUNDARY FOR THAT EXPANSION
AREA IS BASICALLY WHERE THE
RAILROAD BRIDGE IS JUST NORTH
OF DPO STREET SO IT WOULD BE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO LOOK AT ALL
OF THAT AND THAT THE
UNDERSTANDING IS IS THAT THAT
PROJECT WOULD BE COORDINATED
WITH THE JURISDICTIONAL
TRANSFER WORK THAT'S ONGOING TO
UNDERSTAND WHAT OPPORTUNITIES
THERE ARE AND IF IT STAYS WITH
THEM THAT THAT MAY PUSH THE
PROJECT IN ONE DIRECTION IF THE
CITY TAKES OVER LOCAL OWNERSHIP
OF THAT CORRIDOR THAT MAY
CHANGE THE OPPORTUNITY BUT
COULD STILL BE IMPROVEMENTS
WOULD STILL BE ADVANCED ALONG
THERE.
SO IT COULD BE FOR BOTH BOTH
DIRECTIONS DEPENDING ON HOW IT
GOES.
NO FURTHER QUESTIONS
.
THIS IS ALSO LESS OF A QUESTION
OR JUST A COMMENT AS YOU'RE
KIND OF LOOKING FOR FEEDBACK
AND DIRECTION FROM COUNCIL AND
WE'LL LARGELY BE KIND
OF SCANNING SOME COMMENTS FROM
A FEW OF MY COLLEAGUES ON THE
TABLE.
BUT I AM ALSO INCREDIBLY
EXCITED ABOUT WHAT I'M HEARING
ABOUT THE POTENTIAL SERVICE
TEAM PARTICULARLY IT'S NOT JUST
WHAT I HEAR FROM FROM LOCAL
BUSINESSES AS WELL BUT FROM
RESIDENTS AND REALLY THE
CONCERNS IT JUST ABOUT, YOU
KNOW, THE CLEANLINESS AND THE
FEEL AND THE COMFORT OF MOVING
AROUND DOWNTOWN AND I THINK
THAT'S A REAL VALUE ADD FOR US.
AND SO IT'S SOMETHING THAT I'M
REALLY EXCITED ABOUT.
I KNOW THAT THAT AS YOU'RE
GOING THROUGH THIS, THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT'S REALLY ONLY
POSSIBLE WITH THE GAMES YOUR
MODEL AND SO SO THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT I'M REALLY
INTERESTED IN AND EXCITED TO
MOVE FORWARD WITH.
I WILL ALSO ECHO COUNTY COUNCIL
MEMBER IRIS COMMENTS THAT YOU
KNOW, I THINK IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT THAT WE WE TRY AS
HARD AS WE CAN AND LOOK AT
POSSIBILITIES TO MAKE SURE THAT
THOSE ARE GOOD PAYING UNION
JOBS.
I THINK, YOU KNOW, I SHARE THE
SAME CONCERN ABOUT YOU KNOW,
THOSE ARE THOSE ARE JOBS THAT
IF THE CITY WERE EMPLOYING THEM
THEY WOULD A UNION.
SO THAT'S JUST SOMETHING I WANT
TO SHARE AS WELL TO TO BE ON
THE RECORD ABOUT.
GREAT.
THANK YOU FOR THE QUESTIONS.
I'VE GOT A QUESTION ABOUT FIRST
OFF THANK YOU AND THANK
EVERYONE WITH RESPECT TO
EXPANSION AND OTHER
JURISDICTIONS APPRECIATING THAT
YOU JUST SORT OF ARE HOLDING
OFF AND ENGAGING WITH OTHER
FOLKS AFTER SORT OF GETTING A
SENSE OF THE ROOM WHICH IF I
READ THIS CORRECTLY IS
CONSISTENT WITH SCENARIO D
DIRECTIONALITY UP GRAND RAPIDS
HAS HAD A NUMBER OF OF
EXPANSIONS.
HAVE THEY RECEIVED HAS THAT HAS
LED TO THE EXPANSIONS THAT
RECEIVED SUPPORT FROM OTHER
TAXING AUTHORITIES?
YEAH, I DON'T WANT TO SURE.
TOUCH YOU ON THAT ONE.
THANK YOU.
OUR UNDERSTANDING IS YES IT HAS
RECEIVED SUPPORT AND THEY
ACTUALLY MOVED TO THE GAIN
SHARE MODEL IN ORDER TO
MAINTAIN THAT SUPPORT AND KEEP
THOSE TAXING AUTHORITIES OPTING
IN.
>> SO WE'VE WE'VE YOU IN
ADDITION TO THE BENEFITS THAT
THE AUGMENTED DOWNTOWN AND
GENERAL AREA RECEIVE ACCRUE TO
THE OTHER TAXING AUTHORITIES,
THEY WOULD ALSO HAVE THE
GENERAL BENEFITS OF THE GAGGIA
CORRECT.
>> THAT MAKES ALL THE SENSE.
THANK YOU FOR AS WELL AS
PREVIEWING FOR MY PART THERE IS
A GREAT DEAL TO LIKE ABOUT THE
DENHA AND A GREAT DEAL TO LIKE
ABOUT MORE THE DENHA IS IT A
PERFECT EXAMPLE OF THE
CONFLUENCE OF IMPROVING BASIC
SERVICES AND ENHANCING QUALITY
OF LIFE AND THAT DOES SO
THROUGH MAKING OUR OUR DOWNTOWN
AND THE AREAS WITHIN ITS
JURISDICTION CLEANER, SMOOTHER
AND BETTER.
IT'S IT'S THERE FOR RESIDENTS.
IT'S THERE FOR VISITORS, THERE
FOR BUSINESS OWNERS.
IT IT DOES A LOT OF GREAT AND
GOOD WORK AND I I CONCUR WITH
MY COLLEAGUES THAT I LIKE WHAT
I SEE HERE SO THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
THAT'S IT.
OK THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THANK THANK YOU.
YEAH I WAS IN THIS SIX YEARS
SO
NEXT UP WE WANT TO CONTINUE OUR
DISCUSSION OR CONVERSATION WITH
YOU REGARDING RSA PROJECT THAT
IS UNDER CONSIDERATION BY THE
CITY.
OUR INTERNAL TEAM IS LARGE SO
WE'RE GOING TO USE TWO PEOPLE
TO DO THE PRESENTATION THIS
EVENING THAT'LL BE GIANT.
OUR NEW ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
DIRECTOR AND MARTY PACHON WE
HAD A WINDOW OPEN TO RECEIVE
QUESTIONS FROM COUNSEL.
WE HAVE RECEIVED SEVERAL
QUESTIONS AND SO JILL WILL BE
ADDRESSING THOSE AND MARTY WILL
PICK UP THE ONES THAT HE
DOESN'T TOUCH UPON.
AND THEN WHEN WE DO Q&A, WHO
ANSWERS THE QUESTION DEPENDS ON
WHAT THE QUESTION IS.
SO THE TEAMS LARGE WILL JUST
FIGURE THAT OUT AS WE GO ON.
>> THANK YOU.
SO MY NAME IS JOE GIANT.
I'M THE NEW ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
IT'S GREAT TO MEET ALL.
DO YOU FIRST OF ALL, I WANT TO
THANK YOU FOR SEEING THE VALUE
OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN ANN
ARBOR.
I'M PERSONALLY THRILLED TO BE
IN A PLACE IT'S ALREADY AMAZING
BUT STILL ASPIRES TO DO EVEN
BETTER.
OBVIOUSLY A BIG PART OF THAT IS
MAKING SURE THAT OUR WORK
CONTINUES TO BE A CITY WITH
OPPORTUNITY FOR EVERYONE TO
LIVE AND WORK AND SO IT'S
EXCITING TO JUMP TO A
TRANSFORMATIONAL PROJECT LIKE
THIS.
IT'S BIG AND COMPLICATED FROM
WHAT I UNDERSTAND IS SOMEWHAT
UNPRECEDENTED IN THIS COMMUNITY
.
BUT PROJECTS LIKE THIS WHERE
THE CITY ASSUMES THE COST
OF CONSTRUCTING PARKING AS A
WAY TO CATALYZE HIGH QUALITY,
HIGH DENSITY MIXED USE
DEVELOPMENT IS A STANDARD
PRACTICE IN CITIES OF ALL SIZES
.
IN MY PREVIOUS ROLE WE DID A
NUMBER OF PROJECTS LIKE THIS IN
A COMPARABLY SIZED CITY.
THERE'S NO ONE WAY TO DO IT BUT
IS THE PRACTICE THAT WE HAVE
OUR DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS THERE
WORKED A NUMBER OF CITIES LARGE
AND SMALL, SUBURBAN URBAN.
SO BASICALLY THAT'S ONE OF THE
MOST COMMON WAYS THAT
MUNICIPALITIES CAN HELP
INCENTIVIZE THIS TYPE
OF GROWTH.
THEIR COMMUNITY WANTS TO SEE.
BUT WHY IS THAT?
WHY CAN'T THESE PROJECTS STAND
ON THEIR OWN TWO FEET AND
FINANCE THEIR OWN PARKING
STRUCTURES?
IT'S A SIMILAR STORY IN ANY
CITY OBVIOUSLY CANNOT FULLY
FINANCE ITS OWN STRUCTURE
PARKING BECAUSE WITHOUT PUBLIC
SUPPORT THE PROJECT WOULD NOT
MEET THE FINANCIAL FINANCIAL
RETURNS THAT THE DEVELOPERS OR
PROBABLY MORE SPECIFICALLY
THEIR INVESTORS REQUIRE TO
JUSTIFY THE SIGNIFICANT OUTLAY
OF CAPITAL IF INVESTORS CAN
RETURN BETTER RETURNS OR GET
BETTER RETURNS ELSEWHERE AT A
SIMILAR LEVEL OF RISK, THEY'LL
REDIRECT THEIR FUNDS
ACCORDINGLY.
IF THEY WERE TO MAKE IT WORK
WITHOUT OUR PARTICIPATION ON
THE GARAGE WE PROBABLY NEED TO
BE A LOT SMALLER RELATIVE TO
THE REST OF THE PROJECT WHICH
DOESN'T WORK
BECAUSE A CERTAIN
NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES ARE
ABSOLUTELY REQUIRED FOR A
PROJECT LIKE THIS
OR AT THE
RENT FOR THE APARTMENTS WOULD
NEED TO BE A LOT HIGHER AND
THAT'S CERTAINLY NOT SOMETHING
THAT WE'RE INTERESTED IN OR AS
A THIRD ALTERNATIVE PARKING AT
THE GARAGE WOULD NEED TO BE A
LOT MORE EXPENSIVE.
THE LAST PROJECT THAT WAS
SIMILAR THIS THAT I WORKED ON
WE JUST AS AN EXERCISE TRY TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT COST WHAT THE
COST FOR A MONTHLY PERMIT WOULD
BE IF THERE WAS NO PUBLIC
INVOLVEMENT IT WOULD NEED TO BE
FOUR HUNDRED FIFTY DOLLARS A
MONTH FOR IT TO PENCIL OUT.
I'M NOT SURE IT WOULD BE ON
THIS DEVELOPMENT BUT IT'S
SIGNIFICANT.
SO THIS IS WHERE TAX INCREMENT
FINANCING TIF PLAYS A KEY ROLE.
TIF USES ONLY THE NEW TAX
REVENUE GENERATED WITHIN THE
PROJECT ITSELF.
THAT'S REVENUE THAT WOULD NOT
EXIST BUT FOR THE PROJECT TO
PAY FOR ELIGIBLE COSTS LIKE
STRUCTURED PARKING AND
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION OR
THE SIGNIFICANT INFRASTRUCTURE
THAT'S NEEDED TO LITERALLY
TRANSFORM A SUBURBAN LANDSCAPE
INTO A HIGH DENSITY WALKABLE
NEIGHBORHOOD THESE FUNDS ARE
NOT DIVERTED FROM ELSEWHERE IN
THE CITY.
THEY'RE CREATED BY THE
DEVELOPMENT AND REINVESTED IN
IT AND THE IDEA IS BUT FOR THE
TIF THIS DEVELOPMENT WOULDN'T
EXIST IN THE FIRST PLACE.
SO TO ENSURE THAT THIS BUT FOR
TEST IS MET WE WORKED WITH OUR
MUNICIPAL FINANCIAL ADVISOR, A
FIRM CALLED PFM I BELIEVE
THEY'RE PHONING IN SOMEWHERE IN
THE ETHER UP THERE MAYBE TO
REALLY RIGOROUSLY ANALYZE THE
FINANCIAL PROJECTIONS.
SO THAT'S COSTS RENTS,
REVENUES, TAXES AND RETURNS
THAT THE DEVELOPER WOULD MAKE
ON THE PROJECT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THEY'RE IN LINE WITH OUR
EXPECTATIONS.
SO COMING IN FROM THE OUTSIDE
LIKE SEEING ALL THE DUE
DILIGENCE, FINANCIAL AND
OTHERWISE THAT'S ALREADY BEEN
DONE ON THIS PROJECT IS IS
REALLY, REALLY IMPRESSIVE IN
THE AMOUNT OF WORK THAT'S BEEN
DONE TO MAKE SURE THAT THIS IS
A RESPONSIBLE USE OF PUBLIC
MONEY.
THEIR REVIEW PERFORMANCE REVIEW
CONFIRMED THAT THE DEVELOPMENT
WOULD NOT BE VIABLE WITHOUT THE
TEEF AND SO I'M PRESENTING SOME
KIND OF INTERWEAVING A LOT
OF THE QUESTIONS THAT WE
RECEIVED.
I TRY TO MAKE IT INTO A NICE
LOGICAL FLOW BUT IT FEELS LIKE
I MADE A HARD LEFT OR A HARD
RIGHT SOMEWHERE JUST IN TRYING
TO TRACK WITH THE QUESTIONS.
SO TO BEAR WITH ME A LITTLE BIT
SO YES, HERE WE ARE FREE
TONIGHT SO THAT WE CAN ANSWER
YOUR QUESTIONS ABOUT THE
PROJECT.
NOW WE'VE GONE OVER WHAT THE
PROJECT IS A NUMBER OF TIMES
THIS IS GOING TO KIND OF DOVE
INTO THE DETAILS OF JUST THE
FINANCIAL FINANCIAL PARTS
OF IT, THE VARIOUS APPROVALS
THAT YOU'LL SEE.
>> SO WE'RE STILL NEGOTIATING
MANY OF THE DEAL POINTS.
AND YOU KNOW, ON THAT NOTE,
THERE ARE NO ITEMS BEFORE YOU
FOR CONSIDERATION BUT WE ARE AT
A PLACE WHERE WE CAN PROVIDE A
GENERAL OUTLINE OF THE
STRUCTURE AND THE PROCESS.
SO THIS IS TONIGHT'S AGENDA.
DID THE INTRODUCTION I'LL GO
OVER THE OVERALL DEAL STRUCTURE
FOLLOWED BY A DESCRIPTION
OF THE APPROVAL PROCESSES, THE
VARIOUS IMPROVEMENTS OR
AGREEMENTS YOU'LL BE ASKED TO
CONSIDER AND THEN THE RELATIVE
TIMING OF THOSE AGREEMENTS THEN
MARTY, OUR CFO WILL PROVIDE AN
OVERVIEW OF OUR BOND FINANCING
AS IT RELATES TO THIS PROJECT
FOLLOWED BY YOUR Q AND A AS
MILTON MENTIONED, WE HAVE A
WHOLE PHALANX OF FOLKS BEHIND
US THAT CAN ANSWER QUESTIONS.
SO IF THERE'S AN ANSWER TO THE
QUESTION SOMEONE IN THIS ROOM
OR IN THE ETHER WILL BE ABLE TO
ADDRESS IT SO AS FAR AS THE
DEAL STRUCTURE, THESE ARE THE
KIND OF THE MAIN POINTS ONE AS
WE KNOW THE PROJECT WILL BE
BUILT IN PHASES WITH NEW
PARKING DECKS IS INCLUDED IN
PHASES ONE, TWO AND THREE AT
THE DEVELOPER WILL FUND ONE
HUNDRED PERCENT OF THE INITIAL
PROJECT COSTS INCLUDING PUBLIC,
PRIVATE AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING
COMPONENTS, PUBLIC PARKING
GARAGE AND PUBLIC HOUSING,
PRIVATE AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING
COMPONENTS AND THE NECESSARY
INFRASTRUCTURE SO THERE'S NO
INITIAL OUTLAY OF CAPITAL FOR
THE CITY AFTER EACH DEC IS
COMPLETED AND UPON THE
OCCURRENCE OF OTHER KEY
MILESTONES ON THE CITY WILL
PURCHASE THE DECK FOR THE
LESSER OF ITS ACTUAL
CONSTRUCTION COST OR A
PREDETERMINED PRICE.
SO PURCHASING THE DECK UPON
COMPLETION RATHER THAN ISSUING
A BOND FOR CONSTRUCTION HAS A
LOT OF ADVANTAGES.
THIS THIS APPROACH ALLOWS THE
APARTMENTS AND THE DECK WHICH
ARE ESSENTIALLY PART OF THE
SAME BUILDING TO BE CONSTRUCTED
TOGETHER.
PUBLIC BIDDING CAN KIND OF BE
COMPLICATED WHERE YOU COULD
HAVE COMPETING FIRMS VYING FOR
A PROJECT THAT IS WITHIN THE
SAME OVERALL BUILDING.
SO THIS COORDINATION IS
ESSENTIAL.
YOU'D HAVE POTENTIALLY TWO
SEPARATE BID PACKAGES, TWO
SEPARATE STAGING AREAS TO
SEPARATE SCHEDULES.
SO EVEN SO OUR AGREEMENTS WILL
REQUIRE THE DEVELOPER TO USE
BEST VALUE PROCUREMENT TO THE
EXTENT POSSIBLE TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE'RE USING TAXPAYER
DOLLARS RESPONSIBLY AND THIS
ALSO HELPS TO ENSURE THAT WE
WON'T TAKE POSSESSION OF THE
GARAGE UNTIL THE OTHER PARTS
OF THE PROJECT ARE MOVING
ALONG.
THE LAST THING WE WANT IS TO
OWN A PARKING GARAGE SURROUNDED
BY A PROJECT THAT ISN'T MOVING
FORWARD SO THE CITY WILL
FINANCE EACH DEC THROUGH A
SEPARATE BOND ISSUANCE AND
AGAIN WE WILL COME BEFORE
COUNCIL FOR APPROVAL OF EACH
SERIES OF BOND.
SO WE'LL PRESUMABLY COME BEFORE
YOU THREE SEPARATE TIMES TO ASK
FOR FINAL ISSUANCE.
BONDS WILL BE REPAID USING
SOURCES OF REVENUE THAT ARE
GENERATED BY THE PROJECT WHICH
IS NEW TAX INCREMENT FROM THE
PRIVATE COMPONENTS AND NET
PARKING REVENUE GENERATED BY
THE NEW DECS SO NO OTHER
OUTSIDE SOURCES OF FUND
SHOULD BE NEEDED.
>> SEVERAL OF YOU SEVERAL
OF YOUR QUESTIONS REVOLVED
AROUND THE APPROVAL PROCESS SO
I WANTED TO SPEND SOME TIME
DESCRIBING VARIOUS ITEMS THAT
WILL BE COMING BEFORE YOU FOR
APPROVAL.
SO THERE ARE ESSENTIALLY THREE
APPROVAL TRACKS THAT ARE
SEPARATE BUT RELATED FIRST THE
PARKING DECK BOND APPROVALS
WHICH I'LL GET INTO IN A
MINUTE.
I'M SECOND LAND USE APPROVAL.
SO PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVES
OF SITE PLAN AND THEN A LOT
OF TIMES WILL BE A DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT THAT WOULD COME
BEFORE YOU JUST LIKE ANY OTHER
LARGE PROJECT.
I THINK THE KEY POINT WITH THE
LAND USE APPROVALS IS THAT THE
SITE WILL BE FOR ALL PHASES
OF THE PROJECT SO IT WOULD ONLY
COME BEFORE YOU ONCE UNLESS
THERE'S A CHANGE THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING COMPONENT THIS INCLUDES
THE BOND ISSUANCE THAT WILL BE
PAID FOR WITH THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING MILLAGE AND BECAUSE THE
PROJECT WILL ULTIMATELY BE
OWNED BY THE HOUSING COMMISSION
YOU ALMOST APPROVE ACQUISITION
OF THE PROPERTY.
NOW THE PARKING DECK APPROVAL
PROCESS.
SO THESE APPROVALS CAN BE
DIVIDED INTO TWO BATCHES THOSE
THAT SORT OF SET EVERYTHING IN
MOTION WHICH I CALLED THE
INITIAL APPROVALS AND THOSE
THAT OCCUR AFTER A NUMBER
OF CONDITIONS ARE MET PRIOR TO
THE ISSUANCE OF THE BONDS WHICH
I'M CALLING THE FINAL APPROVALS
.
EACH ONE OF THESE ITEMS DOES
REQUIRE COUNCIL APPROVAL.
OUR INTENT IS FOR THEIR GRAIN
AT BLACK AS I TALK ABOUT THEM
BUT THEY'RE EACH SEPARATE
APPROVALS.
OUR INTENT IS FOR MANY OF THESE
TO BE PRESENTED TO YOU AT THE
SAME MEETING BUT THAT MAY NOT
BE POSSIBLE FOR EXAMPLE, THE
BROWNFIELD PLAN NEEDS
ADDITIONAL APPROVALS BROWNFIELD
AUTHORITY, THE COUNTY
COMMISSIONERS AND THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN NEED TO APPROVE IT
AND THAT CAN TAKE UPWARDS OF 90
DAYS SO IT MIGHT GET OUT AHEAD
OF THE OTHER ONES.
SO THE FIRST ONE PUBLIC PRIVATE
AGREEMENT, THE PPA THIS IS
BASICALLY THE CONTRACT BETWEEN
THE CITY AND THE DEVELOPER.
IT DESCRIBES KEY COMPONENTS
OF THE PROJECT LIKE THE GENERAL
SIZE AND LAYOUT OF THE
BUILDINGS WHERE THE PUBLIC IS
GO NO DWELLING UNITS,
COMMERCIAL SQUARE FOOTAGE, A
NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES AND
OTHER IMPORTANT ITEMS LIKE A
TWO ZERO AND ZERO COMPONENTS
THAT WILL BE INCLUDED IN THE
PROJECT AND WE THINK THAT'S
IMPORTANT GIVEN THE DISCUSSION
LAST WEEK TO MAKE SURE THAT
THOSE ITEMS ARE LISTED IN A
CLEAR BLACK AND WHITE FASHION
SO THAT THERE'S NO DISCREPANCY
ON WHAT WAS PROMISED, WHAT WAS
INCLUDED.
SO WE JUST KNOW AT THE END
OF IT IF THEY WERE INCLUDED OR
NOT.
SO THAT WOULD BE INCLUDED IN
THIS THIS PPA DOCUMENT.
SO IN ADDITION IT DESCRIBES THE
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE
DEVELOPER, THE CITY KIND
OF PROVIDES A GENERAL ORDER
OF OPERATIONS.
IT SEEMS THAT A DEVELOPER WILL
FINANCE TO CONSTRUCT THE
PROJECT AND UPON THE OCCURRENCE
OF CERTAIN EVENTS THE CITY WILL
ISSUE BONDS TO ACQUIRE THE
PARKING DECKS.
IT INCLUDES THIS CONCEPT CALLED
THE COMMITMENT DATE WHICH IS A
POINT IN TIME BY WHICH ALL
OF THE CITY'S CONDITIONED TO
MOVE FORWARD NEED TO BE MET AND
WHEN ALL OF THE DEVELOPERS
CONDITIONS NEED TO CLOSE ALSO
NEED TO BE MET SORT OF LIKE THE
DEVELOPERS NOTICE TO PROCEED TO
CONSTRUCTION AND ARE KIND
NOTICE TO PREPARE FOR A BOND
ISSUANCE.
SO THINGS THAT WOULD NEED TO BE
DRESS PRIOR TO THIS COMMITMENT
DATE ARE TYPICALLY THINGS LIKE
THE DEVELOPERS READY TO CLOSE
ON FINANCING FOR ALL PARTS
OF THE PROJECT.
SO INCLUDE THE MARKET RATE
APARTMENTS, THE AFFORDABLE
APARTMENTS IF THEY HAVE
CONSTRUCTION FINANCING FOR THE
PARKING DECK THAT TO ALL
PERMITS WOULD NEED TO BE
APPROVED AND ALL OTHER
APPROVALS RECEIVED.
SO THERE WAS SOMETHING HANGING
UP THAT WOULD DELAY
CONSTRUCTION.
THE CITY HAS APPROVED
CONSTRUCTION PLANS FOR ALL
PARTS OF THE PROJECT.
NOW THAT KIND OF SOUNDS LIKE A
REPEAT OF THE LAST ONE BUT I
WOULD EMPHASIZE THAT THE CITY
IS GOING TO BE OWNING THIS
GARAGE SO WE WILL HAVE A VERY
HEAVY HAND AND PLAYING AND
DECIDING WHAT IT LOOKS LIKE,
HOW IT FUNCTIONS.
SO JUST MEETING BUILDING
CO SPECIFICATIONS ISN'T ISN'T
ENOUGH.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT IT
MEETS OUR SPECIFICATIONS FOR A
GARAGE THAT WE WANT TO OWN AND
OPERATE FOR THE LONG TERM.
WE WOULD VERIFY ANOTHER
CONDITION BEFORE THE COMMITMENT
DATE.
WE VERIFY THAT OUR ASSUMPTIONS
ARE ON TIF REVENUE AND PARKING
REVENUE ARE STILL SUFFICIENT TO
COVER DEBT SERVICE ON THE BOND.
THERE WILL BE OTHER ONES BUT
THOSE ARE THE TYPICAL ONES THAT
WE WOULD LOOK FOR THAT ARE
PROBABLY PROBABLY THE MOST
IMPORTANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
WE'RE MOVING FORWARD
RESPONSIBLY.
AND SO ONCE BOTH PARTIES AGREE
THAT ALL CONDITIONS HAVE BEEN
SUFFICIENTLY MET, THE DEVELOPER
WOULD CLOSE ON HIS PRIVATE
FINANCING AND BEGIN
CONSTRUCTION.
SO THIS PPA DOCUMENT WOULD ALSO
DESCRIBE THE MILESTONES THAT
MUST OCCUR FOR THE CITY TO
ACTUALLY TAKE POSSESSION OF THE
GARAGE.
WE WOULD VERIFY THAT IT WAS
CONSTRUCTED PER THE PLANS.
OBVIOUSLY IT'S NOT SO EASY TO
GO TO THE GARAGE AND SAY HEY,
THIS IS DIFFERENT THAN THE
PLANS AND THEY'RE LIKE WELL
IT'S BUILT ALREADY.
SO WHAT WE WOULD DO TO KIND
OF MITIGATE AGAINST THAT IS WE
WOULD HAVE LIKE AN OWNER'S REP
BE PRESENT THROUGHOUT THE
CONSTRUCTION TO MAKE SURE THAT
EVERYTHING IS BEING CONSTRUCTED
FOR THE PLANS.
IF THERE WERE CHANGE ORDERS OR
ISSUES CAME UP, WE HAD SOMEBODY
ON THE SITE TO MAKE SURE THAT
THEY WERE STILL ACTING IN OUR
INTERESTS.
SO THIS DOCUMENT, THE PPA WOULD
ALSO IDENTIFY CONSTRUCTION
MILESTONES.
THE OTHER ASPECTS OF THE
PROJECT WOULD NEED TO HAVE
REACHED THEM FOR US TO TAKE
POSSESSION OF THE GARAGE AGAIN.
>> WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
THE OTHER PARKING IS NECESSARY
FOR THE PROJECT TO MOVE FORWARD
BUT IT'S PROBABLY THE LEAST
EXCITING PART OF THE PROJECT
.
WE'RE GOING TO MAKE SURE THAT
THE OTHER PARTS OF THE PROJECT
ARE MOVING ALONG BEFORE WE
WOULD WANT TO TAKE POSSESSION
OF THE GARAGE.
NOW WE'RE GETTING THOSE
MILESTONES AND SOME OF THOSE
THINGS ARE STILL BEING
NEGOTIATED.
>> BUT THERE ARE THINGS THAT
WOULD TYPICALLY BE IN A
DOCUMENT LIKE THIS.
SO PART PARCEL WITH THAT
DOCUMENT ARE SOME OTHER RELATED
ONES THAT MUST BE APPROVED FOR
THE PROJECT TO MOVE FORWARD THE
BROWNFIELD TIF PLAN AND THE TIF
REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT.
SO AS I MENTIONED, THE PRIMARY
SOURCE OF FUNDING FOR THE BOND
IS TAX INCREMENT GENERATED BY
THE PRIVATELY OWNED PORTIONS
OF THE PROJECT.
TO DO THIS NEW TIF DISTRICT
WOULD NEED TO BE ESTABLISHED
WHICH REQUIRES YOUR APPROVAL.
THE TIF WORK PLAN WHICH
ACCOMPANIES THAT APPROVAL
OUTLINES WHAT TYPES OF EXPENSES
THE TAX INCREMENT CAN BE USED
FOR AND ESTIMATES HOW MUCH WILL
BE ALLOCATED TO EACH ONE
OF THOSE CATEGORIES.
THE DOCUMENT IS STILL BEING
FINALIZED AND WE'RE WORKING
WITH THE DEVELOPMENT TEAM TO
INTEGRATE MORE TO ZERO AND ZERO
REQUIREMENTS WHICH MAY OR MAY
NOT AFFECT THE BUDGET BUT IT
MIGHT AFFECT HOW THE FUNDS ARE
ALLOCATED WITHIN WITHIN BUDGET.
BUT IN ANY CASE THE MAJORITY
OF THE TIF REVENUE WILL BE
DEDICATED TO BOND PAYMENTS FOR
THE ACQUISITION OF THE PARKING
DECK WITH THE REMAINDER GOING
TOWARD ENVIRONMENTAL
REMEDIATION BOTH ON AND OFF
SITE INFRASTRUCTURE
IMPROVEMENTS.
SO AS I MENTIONED ALSO NEEDS TO
BE APPROVED BY THE COUNTY
BROWNFIELD AUTHORITY, THE BOARD
OF COMMISSIONERS AND THE STATE
SO THAT ANY TAXES THAT WOULD
OTHERWISE GO TO PUBLIC SCHOOLS
ARE REIMBURSED TO THE SCHOOL
DISTRICT IS MADE WHOLE.
SO THE TAX INCREMENT THAT'S
COMING IN WILL BE WILL BE SPLIT
WILL GO TO BOND DEBT SERVICE A
PORTION GO TO THE COUNTY AND
OTHER PORTIONS WILL GO TOWARDS
OUR ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION
INFRASTRUCTURE.
SO THE WAY THAT ALL OF THOSE
WOULD BE ALLOCATED IN VARIOUS
YOU KNOW, THE AGREEMENTS THAT
THERE WOULD BE IRV EXCUSE ME
VARIOUS WAYS OF THOSE TO BE
ALLOCATED WOULD BE CONTAINED IN
THE TIF REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT
WHICH ALSO REQUIRES YOUR
APPROVAL.
THE KEY PROVISION IN THAT
DOCUMENT I THINK THE PROBABLY
OF MOST INTEREST IS THAT WHEN
THE TIF FUNDS COME IN EVERY
YEAR OF THE BOND PAYMENT WOULD
BE THE FIRST THING TO BE PAID
OFF.
SO IT'S A FUNDS BOND AND
DISPUTE RESOLUTION EXCUSE ME.
SO THE TWO FUNDS AS WELL AS NET
PARKING REVENUE WOULD GO
TOWARDS A BOND.
THEY'LL BE ISSUED TO BUY THE
DECKS AND MARTY IS GOING TO GO
OVER SOME OF THE DETAILS
OF MUNICIPAL BONDS.
SO I'M GOING TO KEEP THIS BRIEF
.
BUT THE IMPORTANT THING IS BOND
APPROVAL IS A TWO STEP PROCESS.
THE INTENT RESOLUTION SOMETIMES
CALLED THE INDUCEMENT
RESOLUTION SETS THE PROJECT IN
MOTION AND NOW THAT RESOLUTION
WOULD INCLUDE THE TOTAL AMOUNT
BEING BONDED FOR ALL THREE
DECKS AND IT WOULD ESTABLISH
MAXIMUM INTEREST RATE.
NOW THAT ALL HAPPENS AND THEN
SOME WORK HAPPENED, SOME
PREDEVELOPMENT PERMITTING
FINANCING GET TO THE COMMITMENT
DAY WE HAVE DECIDED THE
DEVELOPERS AND EVERYTHING THAT
THEY SAID THAT THEY NEEDED TO
DO.
>> WE'VE DONE ALL THE THINGS
THAT WE NEED TO DO.
WE MOVE TO CONSTRUCTION TO
FINAL APPROVALS.
SO ASSUMING ALL THE INITIAL
APPROVALS RECEIVED AND
CONDITIONS MET HERE YOU BE
ASKED TO APPROVE A FINAL BOND
AUTHORIZATION RESOLUTION.
I MENTIONED THE INTENT
RESOLUTION WAS FOR ALL THREE
DECKS.
THE FINAL BOND RESOLUTION WOULD
BE REQUIRED FOR EACH PHASE.
>> NOW WE COULD POTENTIALLY
WAIT UNTIL THE GARAGE WAS
COMPLETELY FINISHED TO ACTUALLY
ISSUE THE BONDS BUT WE WOULD
HAVE THE AUTHORITY TO ISSUE
THEM EARLIER IF WE THOUGHT
INTEREST RATES WERE GOING TO
RISE OR IF THERE IS ANOTHER
COMPELLING REASON TO ISSUE THEM
PRIOR TO THE COMPLETION OF THE
KARAJ SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
DISTRICT.
SO THE BOND PAYMENTS ARE SIZED
SO THAT WE CAN COMFORTABLY MAKE
PAYMENTS USING ONLY TEEF IN
THAT PARKING REVENUE.
BUT AS A SAFEGUARD WE PROPOSE
CREATING A SPECIALIST DISTRICT
THAT'S ED THAT WOULD APPLY ONLY
TO PROPERTY OWNERS WITHIN THE
PROJECT AREA.
WE WOULD LIKELY CREATE A
SEPARATE SAID FOR EACH PHASE
BUT THAT'S STILL BEING EXAMINED
SO THE CITY WILL ASSURE THE
CITY THAT THE PRIVATELY OWNED
COMPONENTS OF THE PROJECT WILL
BE OBLIGATED TO PAY A MINIMUM
AMOUNT OF TAXES WHICH WOULD BE
SUFFICIENT TO COVER THE ANNUAL
BOND REPAYMENT OBLIGATIONS IF
THE TIF REVENUE OR THE TIF AND
THE NET PARKING REVENUE FALL
SHORT AGAIN WE'VE WORKED WITH
OUR CONSULTING AND WE WILL
CONTINUE TO WORK WITH THEM TO
MAKE SURE THAT THE BOND IS
SIZED THAT WE CAN COMFORTABLY
MAKE THOSE PAYMENTS SO THE
ACTUAL USE OF THE CITY IS IS
HIGHLY UNLIKELY.
BUT EVEN IF THE CITY HAS TO
KICK IN, IT'S WORTH NOTING THAT
THE BOND IS STILL BEING PAID
OFF WITH REVENUE GENERATED
WITHIN FOUR CORNERS OF THE
PROPERTY.
SO THIS PROVIDES THE CITY AN
EXTRA LAYER OF SECURITY TO
ENSURE THAT NO OUTSIDE FUNDS
ARE REQUIRED NOW THE ULTIMATE
BACKSTOP FOR THIS BOND IS THE
GENERAL FUND WHICH IS AN
EXTREMELY GOOD SOURCE
OF SECURITY FOR THE BOND ALLOWS
US TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE
CITY'S EXCELLENT CREDIT AND
CREDIT RATING FOR OUR FAVORABLE
BOND TERMS.
THE ONLY WAY THAT GENERAL FUND
WOULD BE USED IS IF THE
PROPERTY OWNERS WITHIN THE
PROJECT DIDN'T PAY THEIR TAXES
WHICH HAS ITS OWN SET
OF REMEDIES.
AND ON ANOTHER NOTE, THE CITY
WOULD REQUIRE THAT THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMPONENT
WOULD BE EXCLUDED FROM THE CITY
SO APPROVAL CITY REQUIRES WELL
YOUR APPROVAL IS REQUIRED FOR
THE CITY AND THIS WOULD OCCUR
AROUND THE SAME TIME AS THE
FINAL BOND ISSUANCE SO THAT WE
WOULD WANT TO BE VERY SURE THAT
THE TERMS OF THE SAD LIKE HOW
MUCH PROPERTY WOULD POTENTIALLY
NEED TO PAY IN THE EVENT OF A
SHORTFALL OF VERY CLOSELY TIED
WITH THE BOND THE BOND TERMS
THEN THE BONDS ARE ISSUED,
GARAGES BUILT AND WE BECOME THE
PROUD OWNERS OF ITS SO FEW
OF YOUR QUESTIONS REVOLVED
AROUND THE OPERATIONS AND
MAINTENANCE OF THE FACILITY,
THE COST AND REVENUE
PROJECTIONS INCLUDED IN OUR
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS ARE BASED ON
THE DEVELOPER'S EXPERIENCE WITH
SIMILAR STRUCTURES WE'RE
TALKING AND WE'RE TAKING
ADDITIONAL STEPS TO VALIDATE
THESE THESE PROJECTIONS
SPECIFICALLY TO ENSURE WE'RE
PLANNING APPROPRIATELY.
STAFF HAS MET WITH THE DOWNTOWN
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY DDA WE'VE
ENGAGED THE PARKING CONSULTANT
WHO WILL BE INVOLVED IN THE
PLANNING THE DECKS I THINK IT'S
REVIEW WILL HELP REFINE LONG
TERM MAINTENANCE UP AND
OPERATIONAL COST ASSUMPTIONS
WHICH INCLUDE AT MINIMUM A
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN AND
THE CAPITAL EXPENDITURE SET
ASIDE TO MAKE SURE THAT MONEY
IS AVAILABLE DOWN THE ROAD WHEN
REPAIRS ARE NEEDED.
AND SO WITH PROPER MAINTENANCE,
PROFESSIONAL MANAGEMENT AND A
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN, THESE
DECKS CAN REMAIN SAFE AND
FUNCTIONAL FOR DECADES.
RECEIVE SOME QUESTIONS ABOUT
ITS FUTURE USE PARKING IS STILL
GOING TO BE NEEDED.
WE RECOGNIZE THAT MOBILITY
TRENDS AND USE NEEDS AND URBAN
DESIGN PRIORITIES CONTINUE TO
EVOLVE WHILE STRUCTURED PARKING
IS NECESSARY TO CATALYZE LEVEL
OF MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT
ENVISIONED IN ONE PROBABLY MORE
SO THAN DOWNTOWN BECAUSE WE'RE
ESSENTIALLY STARTING FROM AN
AREA REQUIRING ALMOST COMPLETE
COMPACT CAR DEPENDENCY.
WE ALSO ANTICIPATE THE DEMAND
FOR PARKING MAY DIMINISH OVER
TIME AS DENSITY INCREASES AND
IS MORE SUSTAINABLE TRANSIT OR
TRANSPORTATION OPTIONS BECOME
VIABLE SHOULD PARKING STRUCTURE
PARKING BECOME LESS ESSENTIAL
IN THE FUTURE?
WE'LL EXPLORE OPPORTUNITIES TO
REPURPOSE OR ADAPT THESE
FACILITIES TO SERVE THE
COMMUNITIES HIGHEST AND BEST
USE AT THE TIME IT'S JUST
IMPOSSIBLE TO PREDICT WHAT THE
FUTURE HOLDS BUT WE CAN BE
FAIRLY CERTAIN THAT IT WON'T
LOOK LIKE A TOWER SURROUNDED BY
A MOONSCAPE OF SURFACE PARKING
AS IT EXISTS TODAY.
SO THE BUILDING DENSITY WILL
REQUIRE SOME LEVEL
OF INVESTMENT.
WE RECEIVED A COUPLE
OF QUESTIONS ABOUT GENERAL TO
THE INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS AND
WHAT EFFECT THIS PROJECT WOULD
HAVE ON CURRENT CITY
INFRASTRUCTURE.
WE ARE AWARE OF SANITARY SEWER
CAPACITY CONSTRAINTS IN THIS
AREA.
WE'RE PROACTIVELY DETERMINING
HOW TO BEST ADDRESS THOSE
ISSUES SPECIFICALLY A SANITARY
SEWER COLLECTION SYSTEM.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS CURRENTLY
BEING DEVELOPED.
IT'S EVALUATING CAPACITY ISSUES
SYSTEM WIDE INCLUDING ONE AREAS
WHERE WE EXPECT TO SEE THE
BIGGEST CHANGE IN USAGE AND
WILL PROVIDE RECOMMENDATIONS
RECOMMENDED PROJECTS BE ADDED
TO THE SIPI TO ADDRESS THOSE
NEEDS.
SOURCES OF THE SOURCE
OF FUNDING WILL DEPEND UPON THE
TYPE OF PROJECT RECOMMENDED BUT
IT COULD INCLUDE SPECIAL
ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS A
DEVELOPER OFFSET MITIGATION
CONTRIBUTIONS OR POSSIBLE
UTILITY FUNDS.
NOW IT'S IMPORTANT TO CLARIFY
AT THIS TIME THERE ARE NO
SANITARY TRUNK LINE
IMPROVEMENTS PROPOSED AS PART
THE IRS PROJECT ON THE SANITARY
MODELING ANALYSIS FOR THIS
PROJECT SHOWS NO PREDICTED
BACKUPS OR OVERFLOWS IN THE
DOWNSTREAM SEWER COLLECTION
SYSTEM WITH THE ADDED
DEVELOPMENT FLOWS WHICH WAS
MODELED DURING THE CITY'S WET
WEATHER DESIGN EVENT SCENARIO.
HOWEVER, THE MODELING ANALYSIS
DOES INDICATE THAT THE PROPOSED
DEVELOPMENT WILL EXACERBATE THE
EXISTING WEATHER CONSTRAINTS
AND THE DOWNSTREAM TRUNK LINE
SEWERS SO FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS
WILL BE NEEDED.
IT CAN ACCOMMODATE IT BUT IT IS
GETTING TO REACH ITS CAPACITY.
SO WITH REGARD TO THE
DEVELOPMENT ITSELF, MOST OF THE
STREET NETWORK ON THE SITE IS
PROPOSED TO BE PRIVATE AND
PRIVATE ROADS ARE OF COURSE NOT
MAINTAINED BY THE CITY.
>> THE MAJORITY OF THE
STORMWATER INFRASTRUCTURE ON
THE SITE WILL ALSO BE PRIVATE.
HOWEVER NEW LOCAL WATER AND
SANITARY SEWER PIPING WILL BE
OWNED AND MAINTAINED BY THE
CITY AND WITH A QUESTION ABOUT
MAINTENANCE WE DON'T HAVE
MAINTENANCE ESTIMATES FOR A NEW
UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURE BUT
ANECDOTALLY WELL I THINK
TOTALLY WITH LOTS
OF EXPERIENCE.
NEWER INFRASTRUCTURE TYPICALLY
REQUIRES LESS MAINTENANCE THAN
OLDER INFRASTRUCTURE BUT IT IS
A NEAR CERTAINTY THAT SOMETIME
OVER A 30 YEAR PERIOD SOME
LEVEL OF MAINTENANCE WILL
LIKELY BE REQUIRED.
SO THE LAST TWO QUESTIONS THAT
I WANTED TO ADDRESS HAVE TO DO
WITH THE ANALYSIS THAT WOULD BE
DONE TO CONFIRM DEMAND FOR THE
PARKING DECKS AND THEIR
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE RELATIVE
TO WHAT'S BEEN FORECAST.
SO IT'S KIND OF A TWO PARTER.
ONE, HOW CAN WE BE CONFIDENT
THAT FUTURE PHASES OF THE
PROJECT WILL GENERATE
SUFFICIENT REVENUE SUFFICIENT
REVENUE SO TEEF AND NET PARKING
REVENUE TO SUPPORT DEBT SERVICE
AND TO HOW CAN WE ENSURE THAT
THE PARKING DECKS ARE ACTUALLY
NEEDED IN THE FIRST PLACE?
I'M FIRST REGARDING FINANCIAL
FEASIBILITY AND PERFORMANCE
BEFORE EACH BOND ISSUE THE CITY
WILL WORK CLOSELY WITH
MUNICIPAL ADVISOR TO THOROUGHLY
REVIEW THE DEVELOPER'S
FINANCIAL ASSUMPTIONS INCLUDING
UPDATED PROJECTIONS YOU REQUIRE
YOUR APPROVAL IS REQUIRED FOR
EACH ISSUANCE AND THE PUBLIC
PRIVATE AGREEMENT.
THE PPA DOCUMENT GIVES THE CITY
THE DISCRETION TO DECLINE TO
ISSUE A BOND IF UPDATED
PROJECTIONS DEMONSTRATE THAT
THE PROJECT GENERATED REVENUE
WON'T COVER THE DEBT SERVICE ON
SECOND REGARDING THE DEMAND FOR
PUBLIC DECKS, IT'S POSSIBLE
THAT THE CONSTRUCTION ON THE
SECOND DECK MAY BEGIN BEFORE
TOTAL STABILIZATION OF THE
FIRST PHASE SO THERE MIGHT BE
NOT BE ENOUGH ON THE GROUND
DATA TO FULLY ASSESS THE
PERFORMANCE OF THE EARLIER
PHASES.
THAT SAID, WE WILL ALWAYS
REVIEW THE MOST CURRENT
INFORMATION THAT WE HAVE BEFORE
US BEFORE PROCEEDING WITH ANY
BOND ISSUANCE IF WE AND OUR
DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS AGREE THAT
PARKING DEMAND HAS
SUBSTANTIVELY CHANGED, WE'LL
ACT ACCORDINGLY.
THERE'S NO SENSE IN BUILDING A
PARKING DECK THAT WE KNOW
DOESN'T FIT OUR NEEDS AND
FINALLY WHAT HAPPENS IF THE
DEVELOPMENT EXCEEDS ITS FIFTEEN
PERCENT RETURN ON INVESTMENT?
BUT WE HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO
REDUCE OUR PARTICIPATION IN
LATER PHASES.
ESSENTIALLY WHAT HAPPENS IF THE
DEVELOPMENT IS SUCCESSFUL?
FIRST OF ALL THAT IS AN OUTCOME
THAT WE ARE ALL WITHIN REASON
HOPING FOR BECAUSE IT WOULD
SIGNAL GREAT THINGS FOR THE
CONTINUED REIMAGINING OF RTC.
ONE CORRIDOR'S OUR FINANCIAL
MODELS ARE BASED ON CURRENT
RENTAL RATES AND A REALISTIC
INFLATION FACTOR.
HOWEVER, BECAUSE RETURN ON
INVESTMENT IS TYPICALLY
ASSESSED USING A 10 YEAR PRO
FORMA, IT'S NOT POSSIBLE TO
DETERMINE WHETHER THE DEVELOPER
WILL ULTIMATELY ACHIEVE THE
TARGET RETURN BASED ON JUST A
COUPLE OF YEARS OF DATA.
SO PUT SIMPLY WE WON'T KNOW IF
THOSE TARGET RETURNS ARE BEING
MET FOR SOME TIME NOW THE
SPECIFIC METHODOLOGY FOR
DETERMINING THE CITY'S
PARTICIPATION IN FUTURE PHASES
BEYOND THE FACT THAT THE CITY
WILL BOND FOR AND OWNED THE
PARKING DECKS HAS NOT YET BEEN
FINALIZED WITH THE DEVELOPMENT
TEAM.
THOSE DETAILS WILL BE ADDRESSED
IN THE PPA DOCUMENT WHICH WILL
BE BROUGHT BEFORE COUNCIL IN
THE COMING MONTHS IN WATCHING
THE DA'S PRESENTATION ON HOW
THEY SWITCHED PEOPLE, WE HAD A
CONVERSATION A FEW DAYS AGO
LIKE OH IT WOULD BE AWKWARD TO
HAVE SOMEBODY JUST LIKE GO UP
AND THEN COME BACK AND SOMEBODY
ELSE GO UP AND COME BACK AT THE
END OF THIS I'M THINKING THAT
THEIR APPROACH MAY HAVE HAD
SOME MERIT TO IT BUT I REALLY
APPRECIATE ALL OF YOUR
ATTENTION.
I'M TO ASK MARTY TO COME UP NOW
AND KIND OF GIVE YOU ALL SOME
INFORMATION ABOUT USEFUL
BONDING.
>> THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
FOR MY PART THIS EVENING I'LL
BE SHARING INFORMATION
REGARDING THE BONDING PROCESS
THAT WOULD BE FOLLOWED SHOULD
THE CITY AGREE TO USE ITS
BONDING AUTHORITY FOR THREE
PARKING DECKS ASSOCIATED IN
SUPPORT OF THE ARBOR SOUTH
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.
ALTHOUGH THIS MAY NOT BE THE
MOST EXCITING INFORMATION
YOU'LL RECEIVE THIS EVENING AS
I'VE HEARD FROM MY COLLEAGUES
EARLIER THIS WEEK, IT IS
NONETHELESS IMPORTANT PART
OF THIS PROJECT WHEN THE CITY
ISSUES BONDS WE GENERALLY
UTILIZE THE SAME PROCESS AND
THIS PROCESS SHOULD BE FAMILIAR
TO YOU BECAUSE WE HAVE RECENTLY
DONE THIS FOR OUR DEMO AND
RECONSTRUCTION OF FIRE STATION
NUMBER FOUR.
SO WE BEGIN EACH PROCESS BY
CONDUCTING SOME DUE DILIGENCE
AND AS YOU HEARD MR. GIANT
EXPLAIN TO YOU, WE'VE ENGAGED
BOTH FM AND MILLER CANFIELD WHO
IS OUR BOND ATTORNEY TO HELP US
THROUGH THIS PROCESS AND
DETERMINE THE TAXABLE OR
NONTAXABLE STATUS OF THE BOND
ISSUANCE.
I WILL TELL YOU AT THIS POINT
THAT IT HAS NOT BEEN DETERMINED
WHAT THAT WILL LOOK LIKE AND AS
WE WORK THROUGH THE PROJECT
THAT DETERMINATION WILL BE MADE
.
WE BEGIN COUNSEL'S INVOLVEMENT
WITH THE INTENT RESOLUTION AND
AS YOU HEARD MR. GIANT EXPLAIN,
WE INTEND TO PRESENT TO COUNSEL
THE INTENT TO ISSUE BONDS FOR
ALL THREE PHASES AT ONCE.
THIS PROCESS BEGINS THE FORTY
FIVE FORTY FIVE REFERENDUM
PERIOD OUR FRIENDS IN THE
CLERK'S OFFICE OFFICE HELP US
THROUGH THIS PROCESS BY POSTING
A PUBLIC NOTICE TO OUR ELECTORS
AND THAT KICKS OFF OUR FORTY
FORTY FIVE DAY PERIOD DURING
THAT PERIOD IF WE DO NOT
RECEIVE A PETITION FROM
ELECTORS 10 PERCENT OF ELECTORS
ARE OR FIFTEEN THOUSAND IF WE
DON'T HEAR FROM THEM THAT THEY
WANT TO GO TO A VOTE OF THE
PEOPLE WE CAN THEN MOVE FORWARD
WITH OUR OUR BONDING PROCESS
WHICH IS TYPICALLY WHAT HAPPENS
AND HAS HAPPENED WITH OUR ISSUE
FOR OUR FIRE STATION NUMBER
FOUR.
>> WELL THAT IS HAPPENING THE
FINANCE TEAM ALONG WITH PFM,
OUR FINANCIAL ADVISER BEGIN
WORKING ON OUR PRELIMINARY
OFFICIAL STATEMENT.
THIS ACTUALLY IS A DOCUMENT
THAT GOES OUT TO INVESTORS AND
UNDERWRITERS THAT EXPLAINS THE
CITY'S FINANCIAL POSITION AND
THE STRUCTURE OF THE DEAL.
IT GAINS INTEREST IN THE
ISSUANCE AND STARTS TO LET
BIDDERS KNOW IF THEY WANT TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE OFFERING.
WE THEN WILL APPROACH COUNSEL
WITH THE ACTUAL BOND
AUTHORIZATION AND AS JOE
INDICATED TO YOU, WE WILL
APPROACH CITY COUNCIL AT THREE
DIFFERENT OCCASIONS FOR THE
THREE DIFFERENT PHASES DECS
ONE, TWO AND THREE AND THAT
RESOLUTION WILL COVER THE
PURCHASE OF THE COMPLETED TAX
IN THE LAND IN WHICH IT SITS
UPON.
>> WHILE THAT IS HAPPENING WE
ALSO ARE SEEKING OUR BOND
RATING AND I TAKE EVERY
OPPORTUNITY TO PUBLICLY SAY
THAT THE CITY CURRENTLY HAS A
AAA BOND RATING, THE HIGHEST
BOND RATING THAT IS AVAILABLE.
THIS DOES ALLOW US TO RECEIVE
FAVORABLE OFFERINGS IN
CONSIDERING THE CURRENT MARKETS
THAT WE ARE IN.
WE DID VERY WELL WITH OUR
RECENT BOND SALE.
SO THIS BRINGS MULTIPLE BIDDERS
AND USUALLY A GOOD SITUATION
FOR THE CITY IN THE EVENT THAT
WE HAVE TO ISSUE DEBT WE THEN
FORMALLY HAVE THE BOND SALE AND
THAT ACTUAL SALES TAKES PLACE
AND A DATE SPECIFIC PFM AS OUR
MUNICIPAL ADVISOR GATHERS THE
BIDS AND ONCE THE WINNING
BIDDER IS DETERMINED WE GO
THROUGH OUR OFFICIAL STATEMENT
PROCESS WHICH INDICATES THE
ACTUAL STRUCTURE OF THE DEAL
SPECIFICALLY THE TERM THE
INTEREST RATE AND THE BONDING
AMOUNT AND THEN FINALLY WITHIN
TWO TO FOUR WEEKS OF CLOSE WE
HAVE THE PROCEEDS IN OUR
ACCOUNTS AND WE HAVE IT
AVAILABLE FOR USE.
>> OBVIOUSLY ONCE YOU HAVE A
BOND YOU HAVE TO PAY BACK ONCE
THE BOND CLOSING OCCURS WE GET
IN AMORTIZATION SCHEDULE AND
LAYS OUT THE REQUIREMENTS TO
REPAY THAT DEBT AND AS MR.
GIANT INDICATED RIGHT NOW THE
CURRENT ANALYSIS OF THE
REPAYMENT THE BONDS WILL
REQUIRE BOTH AT ACTIVE AND
PARKING REVENUE TO SATISFY THAT
DEBT AND SHOULD THE TIFE NOT
COME IN IS FORECASTED WE WILL
UTILIZE AND SAD TO BACK THE TEF
AS JOE ALSO MENTIONED THE DUE
DILIGENCE ON THIS PROJECT WILL
CONTINUE THROUGH THE LIFE
OF THE PROJECT.
IT DOESN'T STOP AT THE INITIAL
ONSET OF THE PROJECT AS WE
CONTINUE TO MOVE THROUGH THE
PROJECT AND THE MARKET
CONDITIONS CHANGE OR THE DEAL
CHANGES THE FINANCIAL
RECOMMENDATIONS INCLUDING THE
DEBT ISSUANCE MAYBE ADJUSTED.
THAT'S ALL I HAVE FOR THIS
EVENING AND I GUESS THAT WILL
KICK OFF THE QUESTION PORTION
OF OUR PRESENTATION
.
>> I GUESS THE FIRST THING I'LL
SAY IS SHOULD BE OBVIOUS WHY WE
HIRED JOE HE BRINGS A LOT TO
THE TABLE HAS DONE THESE KIND
OF THINGS MULTIPLE TIMES.
I THINK THE EASIEST WAY IS IF
YOU JUST ASK YOUR QUESTION AND
FOR MY COLLEAGUES IN THE
AUDIENCE WHICH ALSO INCLUDES
MEMBERS OF THE DEVELOPMENT
TEAM, THE APPROPRIATE PERSON
YOU'LL KNOW WHO YOU ARE ABOUT
IT.
THE QUESTION IS ASKING JUST
COME UP HERE AND ANSWER IT
INSTEAD OF TRYING TO SORT IT
ALL OUT.
ANSWER QUESTIONS FROM COUNSEL
KATHY MCCONNELL CAN'T BELIEVE
I'M THE GM THAT'S GOING TO ASK
THIS QUESTION.
BUT YOU MENTIONED EARLIER THAT
YOU'RE GOING TO DO YOUR BEST
WITH THE BEST VALUE CONTRACTING
.
>> IS THAT A COMMITMENT FROM
THE DEVELOPER OR IS THAT A
WE'RE GOING TO TRY
?
OH, THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
SO THE CITY USES BEST VALUE
VALUE PROCUREMENT TO PROCURE
PROCURE SERVICES SO THAT IT WAS
THE LOWEST BID THAT GETS YOU
THE BEST THE BEST PROJECT WHEN
WHEN YOU'RE DOING A PUBLIC A
PUBLIC PROJECT A LOT OF TIMES
LIKE THE PROCEDURE IS VERY,
VERY LIKE INGRAINED IN LIKE YOU
LIKE CITY STAFF.
WE'RE VERY USED TO BIDDING OUT
A PROJECT IN A CERTAIN A
CERTAIN WAY AND IF A PRIVATE
ENTITY IS DOING IT, IT'S JUST
NOT GOING TO FOLLOW THAT SAME
EXACT PATHWAY JUST BECAUSE IT'S
DIFFERENT PEOPLE DOING IT A
DIFFERENT WAY.
>> BUT THE FACT THAT WE WOULD
REQUIRE THEM TO ADHERE TO ANY
PARTS THAT WERE REASONABLE AND
YOU KNOW, APPLICABLE TO
WHATEVER WHATEVER IT IS THEY
WERE BIDDING OUT IT WOULD BE IT
WOULD BE IN THAT PPA AGREEMENT
.
IT JUST WOULDN'T NECESSARILY BE
DONE IN THE SAME LIKE PROCESS
AND FORMAT THAT WORKS
DEPARTMENT WOULD DO IT IF THAT
HELPS SUMMER MALIK, THANK YOU
BOTH FOR THAT PRESENTATION.
>> IT WAS VERY WELL DONE.
MY FIRST QUESTION IS MOSTLY
RELATED TO THE INFORMATION
BEING PRESENTED TONIGHT WAS
SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT THAN WE HAD
BEEN PRESENTED OVER THE PAST
MONTH OR TWO MOSTLY RELATED TO
KIND OF THE ORDER OF OPERATIONS
NAMELY PREVIOUSLY WE WERE TOLD
THE CITY WOULD LIKELY BUY THE
LAND FIRST, THEN BUILD THE
DECKS THEMSELVES AND THAT WOULD
START THIS WHOLE PROCESS.
NOW IT'S THE DEVELOPER DOING
THAT KIND OF FUN AND STUFF.
THIS ISN'T NECESSARILY A BAD
THING BUT I'M JUST CURIOUS WHAT
PROMPTED KIND OF THIS CHANGE IN
APPROACH KILLS BUT IT'S NOT
REALLY A CHANGE OF APPROACH IS
MORE THAN ABOUT
BEING OF THE
DEAL BEING STRUCTURED SO WHEN
WE INITIALLY STARTED TALKING
ABOUT THE DEAL WE WEREN'T
TALKING ABOUT IT SAID WE HEARD
CONCERN ABOUT MAKING SURE THAT
THE CITY MAXIMIZE ITS
PROTECTION TO MITIGATE AGAINST
RISK.
THAT'S WHAT HE SAID CAME FROM
THERE WAS ALSO A DISCUSSION
ABOUT THE CITY BUILDING AND
OWNING AS YOU REFERENCED AS WE
CONTINUE TO EVOLVE AND PUTTING
THE DEAL TOGETHER TO ADDRESS
THE CONCERN THAT WE HEARD WE
EVOLVED TO BUYING THE DECK
AFTER IT'S ALREADY BEEN BUILT.
THERE WAS ALSO A CONSIDERATION
THAT YOU HEARD MR. GIANT
REFERENCE ABOUT MULTIPLE
CONTRACTORS IF THE GARAGE AND
THE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING ARE
TOGETHER, YOU REALLY DON'T WANT
TO SEPARATE CONSTRUCTION TEAMS
WORKING OUT THERE TOGETHER.
YOU WANT COORDINATE
CONSTRUCTION.
THIS WILL HELP ENSURE THAT IT
ALSO PROVIDES A LEVERAGE POINT
TO THE CITY.
>> WE HAVE THE CHOICE AS TO
WHEN TO ISSUE THE DEBT.
WE'RE NOT GOING TO BUY A
PRODUCT.
THAT'S NOT WHAT WE SAID.
WE WANT IT.
WE ALSO WILL BE INVOLVED IN
DETERMINING WHAT THE DECK LOOKS
LIKE AND HOW IT FUNCTIONS YET
TO BE DETERMINED HOW IT'LL BE
MANAGED BECAUSE WE DON'T WE
HAVEN'T SOLVED IT YET BUT WE
WILL POINT I'M REALLY TRYING TO
MAKE IS THESE KIND OF DEALS
NORMALLY WILL EVOLVE AND SO YOU
WILL MAKE THE BEST POSSIBLE
DECISION AT THE TIME WHEN YOU
NEED TO LOCK DELBERT'S INTO THE
DEAL AND THAT'S WHAT BOTH SIDES
ARE DOING.
GREAT.
THANK YOU FOR THAT EXPLANATION
.
MY SECOND QUESTION IS RELATED
TO THE SPECIAL DISTRICT.
WHAT THE SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
DISTRICT.
THANK YOU.
I'M CURIOUS IF BY UTILIZING
THAT SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
DISTRICT DOES THAT HELP US GET
MORE FAVORABLE BONDING TERMS BY
HAVING THIS ADDITIONAL LEVEL
OF PROTECTION IN PLACE TO REPAY
THE BOND?
>> I'M GLAD GLAD TO TAKE THIS
OPPORTUNITY TO INTRODUCE OUR
OUTSIDE COUNSEL FOR THIS
PROJECT FAZZIO FOR MILLER
CANFIELD.
GOOD EVENING EVERYONE.
AS TO YOUR QUESTION,
COUNCILPERSON, THE INTEREST
RATE ON THE BONDS WILL BE
DRIVEN BY THE CREDIT RATING
OF THE CITY.
THERE ARE ISSUES ON THE TAX
SIDE OF THE BONDS AS TO WHETHER
OR NOT THEY ARE SUPPORTED BY A
PRIVATE GUARANTEE THAT COULD IN
FACT COULD AFFECT THE TAX
ABILITY OF THOSE BONDS SO THE
SA'ADI WILL NOT BE AN
ENHANCEMENT TO THE ISSUER OR
REDUCE THE INTEREST RATES ON
THE PROJECT.
UNDERSTOOD.
THANK YOU COUNCILMAN.
BRITISH THANK YOU.
THANK YOU FOR THE PRESENTATION
.
SO I WAS HAPPY TO HEAR THAT YOU
MENTIONED THAT IN ADDITION TO
BASING THE COST AND REVENUE
ASSUMPTIONS WITH THE TAX ON
DEVELOPER EXPERIENCE WITH
SIMILAR PROJECTS YOU'VE GOT
THIRD PARTIES AND TO VERIFY
THAT AND I WONDERED IF YOU
ANTICIPATED THAT THERE WOULD BE
REVISED NUMBERS WHEN MIGHT
THOSE BE AVAILABLE FOR?
WELL, ONE WE WOULD REVISE
NUMBERS FOR EACH SUBSEQUENT
BOND ISSUANCE THAT WOULD BE
FURTHER FURTHER DOWN THE LINE
WE WOULD LOOK FOR REVISED
NUMBERS PRIOR TO THAT
COMMITMENT DATE WOULD BE THE
BIG KIND OF GO GO OR NO GO
MOMENT.
SO WE WOULD LOOK FOR A SET
OF THE MOST RECENT ASSUMPTIONS
THEN I DON'T KNOW THAT WE WOULD
HAVE BEFORE THEN.
I KNOW THE DEVELOPER IS STILL
CONTINUALLY WORKING ON THEIR
PRO FORMA BUT I KNOW THAT THERE
IS A FIRM LINE IN THE SAND THAT
WE WILL VERIFY OUR ASSUMPTIONS
PRIOR TO THAT COMMITMENT DATE
TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE STILL
ABLE TO MEET OUR OBLIGATIONS
SHOULD WE CHOOSE TO GO FORWARD.
>> OK,
IT'S CASAROLI THANK YOU
.
I WANTED TO RETURN TO THE
QUESTION OF BIDDING THE PROJECT
OUT AND JUST WANTED TO GET A
LITTLE BIT MORE DETAIL ABOUT
HOW WE WOULD MAKE SURE THAT
THERE ARE THE THINGS THAT WE
CARE ABOUT IN THAT AGREEMENT.
AND I ALSO WANTED TO JUST RAISE
THE QUESTION OF POTENTIALLY
THERE BEING A PROJECT LABOR
AGREEMENT IF THAT WOULD MAKE
SENSE TO COVER SOME OF THE
THINGS THAT WE TYPICALLY ARE
LOOKING FOR IN THE BEST VALUE
PROCUREMENT PROCESS.
>> SURE, I'M NOT GOING TO BE
ABLE TO ADDRESS THE SECOND ONE
BUT I'LL TRY TO ADDRESS THE
FIRST ONE.
I'M TRYING TO GET THE THINGS
THAT WE WANT OUT OF OUR OUT
OF OUR PARKING GARAGE SO THERE
ARE A FEW CHECKPOINTS ALONG THE
WAY AND THERE IS THE ACTUAL
PLANNING PROCESS.
SO WE JUST AS RECENTLY AS THIS
LAST WEEK ENGAGED A PARKING
CONSULTANT TO HELP US WITH, YOU
KNOW, JUST CLEANING THE GARAGE
TO MAKE SURE THAT IT FUNCTIONS
AS A REALLY WELL OPERATING
GARAGE JUST ENTRANCES, EXITS,
FLOW LAYOUT PARKING EQUIPMENT
WHICH MAKES A BIG DIFFERENCE TO
WHETHER YOU KNOW, A GARAGE IS
USED OR NOT.
BUT I THINK THAT YOU'RE
PROBABLY GETTING AT SOME MORE
YOU KNOW, ADDITIONAL FEATURES
SUCH AS SUSTAINABILITY, YOU
KNOW, TRANSPORTATION SOME SOME
OF THOSE SOME OF THOSE ITEMS
THAT WE ARE KIND OF NOW I'M
THINKING MORE ABOUT WHETHER THE
FOLKS BUILDING IT HAVE BEEN
PROPERLY TRAINED, WHETHER
THEY'RE BEING PAID PREVAILING
WAGE, WHETHER THEY'RE THEY HAVE
HEALTH CARE AND BENEFITS, THOSE
TYPES OF THINGS.
WELL, DURING THAT DURING THE
PLANNING PROCESS FOR THE GARAGE
WE'D HAVE WE'D HAVE SOMEBODY
INVOLVED THROUGH THROUGH THAT
AND WE WOULD VERIFY THAT THE
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS, YOU
KNOW, WERE, YOU KNOW,
CONSTRUCTED FOR OUR
EXPECTATIONS FOR HOW WE WANT
THE GARAGE TO BE.
WE WOULD VERIFY THAT PRIOR TO
THE PRIOR TO THE COMMITMENT
DATE AND THEN WE'D HAVE AN
OWNERS REP ON SITE THROUGH THE
CONSTRUCTION PROCESS TO MAKE
SURE THAT IT WAS BEING
CONSTRUCTED THE WAY THAT WE
EXPECTED TO BE CONSTRUCTED.
NOW REGARDING THE PEOPLE THAT
ARE ACTUALLY DOING THE WORK,
I'M NOT PROBABLY THE BEST
PERSON TO TO ADDRESS THAT
QUESTION.
PERHAPS THE DEVELOPER COULD
IN
ALL HONESTY, WE'VE NOT BEEN
ASKED OR HAD THE OPPORTUNITY TO
REVIEW REQUIREMENTS MIGHT BE I
THINK WE ALL HAVE AN INTEREST
IN MAKING SURE THAT WE HAVE
WELL TRAINED AND WELL PAID
EMPLOYEES DOING THIS KIND
OF WORK.
I DON'T THINK STANDARDLESS IS
WHAT YOU'RE LOOKING FOR THOUGH
COUNCIL MEMBER AND I APPRECIATE
THAT WE'RE CERTAINLY WILLING TO
LOOK INTO THAT WITH THE TEAM
BUT WE JUST HAVE NOT HAD THE
OPPORTUNITY TO DO SO AS OF YET.
>> HAVE YOU AND PROJECT LABOR
AGREEMENTS IN PREVIOUS WE HAVE
DONE WE HAVE PERFORMED THINGS
THAT ARE SIMILAR TO THE TYPES
OF THINGS THAT YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT.
THEY'VE NEVER BEEN REFERRED TO
AS A PROJECT LABOR AGREEMENT
SPECIFICALLY.
BUT I WITH MANY CITIES THERE'S
PREVAILING WAGE REQUIREMENTS.
THERE'S OTHER UH LOCAL
REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO BID
PROCESSES OFTEN.
AND SO WE'RE FAMILIAR BUT
BECAUSE THEY CAN BE BESPOKE
WOULD NOT FEEL COMFORTABLE
COMMITTING ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
WITHOUT SPENDING SOME TIME ON
IT.
SO YEAH, JUST NOW THAT'S
SOMETHING TO TO DIG INTO FOR
SURE.
THANK YOU.
ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS CARSON
BRITISH I JUST WONDERED ARE WE
DO WE YET KNOW THAT THE PARKING
GARAGE IS SUFFICIENTLY PUBLIC
IN USE TO BE FINANCED WITH
PUBLIC FUNDS?
>> OH WE ARE VERY, VERY
COMMITTED TO MAKING SURE THAT
THESE BONDS ARE TAX EXEMPT AND
TO DO THAT THERE ARE AS CLEAR
AS THERE CAN BE REQUIREMENTS
THAT THEY BE PUBLICLY LIKE A
PUBLIC USE THAT WE WOULDN'T BE
ABLE TO MASTER LEASE IT.
WE WOULD NEED TO ALLOCATE
PARKING LIKE MONTHLY PARKING
PASSES A CERTAIN WAY.
SO YEAH, OUR OUR INTENT AND OUR
PLANNING ALL ALONG IS TO DO
WHAT WE NEED TO DO TO MAKE SURE
THAT THESE ARE TAX EXEMPT BONDS
AND THIS IS PURELY A PUBLIC
PARKING GARAGE RATHER THAN
SOMETHING THAT'S JUST BUILT FOR
A SPECIFIC PROJECT.
AND I KNOW IN THE IN THE PFM
DOCUMENT THAT WE HAVE IT LOOKS
LIKE A MONTHLY OFFICE PARKING
LEASE IS THIRTY DOLLARS A MONTH
WHICH IS A DOLLAR A DAY.
THAT WOULD BE A GREAT RATE.
>> I KNOW THAT'S WELL THAT'S
WHAT IT SAYS IN THERE THOUGH IS
ALL RIGHT I DON'T KNOW HIM
PERSONALLY.
I SAID THERE ARE FROM BUT I CAN
SAY IS THERE'S BEEN A LOT
OF NUMBERS SUGGESTED TO
DETERMINE WHAT WOULD BE
POTENTIALLY REASONABLE REVENUE
THAT WE COULD HAVE ACCOUNT FOR
FROM THE DECK.
AND THERE'S A LOT OF MODELS
THAT WE'RE LOOKING AT IN FORM
LOOKED AT THOSE MODELS WILL
HAVE TO PASS THE TAX STATUS
BEFORE WE'RE ABLE TO ISSUE
PERMITS AT ANY LEVEL WE CAN'T
DO.
AND I'M GOING TO SPEAK AND LOOK
AT JOE AND ELAINE EVERYBODY.
BUT WE CANNOT DO SPECIAL DEALS
WITH CERTAIN PEOPLE AND THEN
NOT ALLOW THOSE DEALS TO BE HAD
BY THE PUBLIC AT LARGE AS WELL.
SO ANYTHING WE DO CAN'T BE
SPECIFIC USER CENTRIC.
IF I UNDERSTAND THE TAX EXEMPT
PROCESS CORRECTLY.
SO EVERYTHING WE DO WILL HAVE
TO BE EQUIVALENT OR WE CAN
ASSIGN SPACES TO A EXISTING
USERS AT SPECIAL RATES AND THEN
DENY THE PUBLIC THOSE WE CAN
ASSIGN SPACES WE HAVE AND I
THINK AS WELL AS POSSIBLY
EDUCATED AND VETTED ON WHAT
CONSTITUTES A TAX EXEMPT DECK
AND ANYTHING THAT WAS REVIEWED
BY PFM PRIOR TO THAT VETTING
WOULD NOT BE PUT IN PLACE.
SO SOMETHING LIKE THAT THAT MAY
HAVE BEEN USED AS AN EXAMPLE
SIX MONTHS AGO WHEN WE WERE
VETTING NUMBERS IF THAT WOULD
DISQUALIFY THE DECK FROM TAX
STAMP TAX
EXEMPT STATUS THEN
THAT WOULD NOT BE ALLOWABLE AND
THE DEVELOPER WAS AWARE OF THAT
WE ALL AND HAVE HAD EXTENSIVE
CONVERSATIONS ON IT SO SOME
OF THOSE NUMBERS WERE FOR
MODELING PURPOSES AS TO HOW DO
WE ASSURE THE REVENUE FROM THE
DECKS ALONG WITH THE TIFE WILL
COVER THE BOND PAYMENT AND THAT
WAS THE EXTENT OF THOSE BUT
THERE WOULD BE NOTHING DONE
THAT CHALLENGES OR PUTS THE TAX
EXEMPT STATUS AT RISK.
OK, THAT'S GREAT.
AND I JUST DID WANT TO SAY THAT
FOR SURE ON PAGE ELEVEN THE
SCENARIO ASSUMPTIONS ARE THAT
AN APARTMENT 24 HOUR LEASE
SPACE FOR A MONTH WOULD BE ONE
HUNDRED AND TWENTY TWO DOLLARS
THIS YEAR.
I THINK YOU'RE SAYING THIS IS
JUST ILLUSTRATIVE FOR MODELING
PURPOSES BUT THE OFFICE PARKING
WOULD BE THIRTY DOLLARS SPACE
PER MONTH.
YEAH THAT SEEMS MISHMOSH SO
KESSMAN REDUCED THE ONE THING I
WANT TO CIRCLE BACK TO THAT YOU
HEARD FROM MR. GIANT AND I
THINK ALSO FROM THIS PRESSURE
ON WHEN WE BRING YOU THE DEBT
ISSUANCE FOR THE BOND FOR THE
FIRST DECK THAT WILL HAVE
LOCKED IN THE MOST UP TO THE
MINUTE INFORMATION THAT WE HAVE
AT THAT TIME.
SO REGARDLESS OF WHAT WE'RE
TELLING YOU TONIGHT, THE NORMAL
PROCESS IS YOU'RE CONTINUING TO
BUILD YOUR INFORMATION BEFORE
YOU ACTUALLY LOCK IN AND PULL
THE TRIGGER.
IT'S THE SAME AS IF YOU'RE
BUYING A HOUSE YOU'RE GOING TO
GET ALL THE WAY UP TO CLOSING
IN IT EVERYTHING LOCKS IN SO
TOO MANY PEOPLE ARE WORKING ON
THIS DEAL TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
COVER EVERY PARTICULAR ANGLE.
BUT WHEN WE COME TO YOU TO ASK
YOU TO ACTUALLY VOTE TO ALLOW
US TO ISSUE THE DEBT WE WILL
HAVE LOCKED IN THE MOST UP TO
DATE INFORMATION THAT WE CAN AT
THAT POINT SOMEWHERE.
MALIK, I GUESS IT WAS A NIGHT
OF GREAT TIFF PRESENTATIONS BUT
THIS WAS A QUESTION FOR I
BELIEVE ADMINISTRATOR TO HONI
OR PERHAPS MR. GIANT FOR THE
QUESTIONS THAT WERE SUBMITTED
IN ADVANCE TONIGHT.
WILL THEY BE SUPPLIED TO
COUNSEL IN WRITTEN FORM AS WELL
?
JUST SIT CLOSER.
>> THANKS, MR. GIEDD.
I'LL DO THE EXERCISE.
>> WE HADN'T PLANNED ON THAT.
THIS IS KIND OF A DIFFERENT
SESSION.
>> THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
COUNSEL ASKED US TO DO.
WE RUSHED IT TO GET IT ON
BEFORE MONDAY NIGHT'S
PRESENTATION.
SO SARAH, HAS IT DONE HER
NORMAL PROCESS OF CREATING A
WRITTEN DOCUMENT BUT WE'VE MADE
SURE WE'VE RESPONDED TO EVERY
QUESTION THAT WE'VE HEARD IF WE
COULD GET THEM IN WRITING AND
NO RUSH THAT WOULD BE VERY MUCH
SO APPRECIATED.
THAT'S GOING TO TAKE A
REASONABLE WEEK.
WE CAN WE CAN DO THAT GREAT.
THANK YOU.
FURTHER QUESTIONS ARE ONE THING
THAT HAVE BEEN DISCUSSED OR AT
LEAST MENTIONED AT SOME POINT
WE ISSUE THESE BONDS.
WE UTILIZE EXCLUSIVELY THE
TAXES GENERATED BY THIS PROJECT
WHICH IS TO SAY THAT IF YOU'RE
LISTENING TO MY VOICE YOUR
TAXES WILL NOT BE USED FOR THIS
TO PAY OFF THESE BONDS.
WE USE THE TAXES FROM THE FROM
THIS PARTICULAR DEVELOPMENT TO
PAY OFF THESE BONDS.
WE USE THE REVENUE FROM THE
PARKING DECKS TO PAY OFF THESE
BONDS.
MY ASSUMPTION IS THAT THERE
SOME ANTICIPATED OVERAGE THERE
HAD BEEN SOME CONVERSATION
ABOUT THE USE OF THAT OVERAGE
FOR SANITARY IMPROVEMENT.
IS THAT PART OF THIS CONTEXT?
IS THAT A SEPARATE CITY POLICY?
IS THAT PART OF THIS DEAL?
IS THAT STILL TTB THE FIRST
PLETT WE HAVE TO GET TO IS
EXACTLY HOW MUCH DO WE NEED TO
PAY BACK THE DEBT IF THERE IS
ADDITIONAL TITH PROCEEDS
AVAILABLE?
WE ANTICIPATE THAT THERE WILL
BE THE ADMINISTRATOR POSITION
HAS BEEN AND STILL IS THAT IT'S
A GO TO ADDRESS INFRASTRUCTURE
RELATED NEEDS IN THE AREA IF
COUNCIL DECIDES THAT IT SHOULD
BE USED FOR SOMETHING ELSE,
THAT'S YOUR PURVIEW.
>> BUT AS I UNDERSTAND IT, ALL
OF THE USES NEED TO BE LOCKED
IN AHEAD OF TIME.
YOU CAN'T JUST ADD ON SOMETHING
LATER BY SAYING IT RIGHT.
>> SO THAT'S KIND OF WHERE WE
ARE.
WE STILL BELIEVE THE
INFRASTRUCTURE NEED TRUMPS
EVERYTHING ELSE FROM OUR
POSITION.
YOU WILL HEAR ME TALK A LITTLE
BIT MORE ABOUT INFRASTRUCTURE
ON MONDAY NIGHT BUT WE DIDN'T
WANT TO GET TOO MUCH INTO THAT
TONIGHT BECAUSE THAT'S REALLY
BROADER THAN THE ARBOR SOUTH
PROJECT.
>> IT'S MORE OF A CITYWIDE SO
THAT USAGE WILL BE SET IN ONE
OF THE DOCUMENTS THAT COUNCIL
WILL APPROVE ON THE FRONT END.
>> YEAH, WELL WE'LL BE DRAWING
DOWN MONEY AGAINST PREVIOUSLY
APPROVED USES.
THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER QUESTIONS, COUNCILMAN
?
>> THIS IS A FOLLOW UP TO MAYOR
TAYLOR'S QUESTION.
MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT THE
FULL COST OR THE MAJORITY
OF THE COST I GUESS CAN YOU
HELP BREAK DOWN THE PERCENTAGE
OF THE COST FOR THE SEWER LINE
THAT WILL BE COVERED BY TIFF BY
THE BROWNFIELD?
NOT NOT TO THAT KIND
OF SPECIFIC CITY?
I CAN'T DO THAT STANDING HERE
TONIGHT.
NO
, I WAS GOING TO SAY AS WE
REVIEW THE BROWNFIELD PLAN, THE
BROWNFIELD PLAN IS THE PLACE
WHERE THIS WILL BE IDENTIFIED
WHERE ALL THE ELIGIBLE
ACTIVITIES ARE LISTED AS THE
WAY THE BROWNFIELD PLAN IS
CURRENTLY STRUCTURED AND THESE
NUMBERS ARE MOVING AS WE LEARN
MORE ABOUT INTEREST AND STUFF.
BUT THERE WAS A THERE WAS A
AMOUNT OF TIFE THAT HAD NOT
BEEN ASSIGNED TO AN ELIGIBLE
ACTIVITY IS SOMEWHERE BETWEEN
20 AND 50 MILLION DOLLARS
DEPENDING ON HOW THE INTEREST
SHAKES OUT AS OF RIGHT NOW THAT
TIF HAS BEEN ASSIGNED TO THE
ELIGIBLE ACTIVITY OF THE
SANITARY SEWER INFRASTRUCTURE
PROJECT AS THAT NUMBER CHANGES
THAT WILL DICTATE HOW MUCH
OF THAT IS GONE.
I DON'T THINK WE HAVE A FINAL
NUMBER YET FOR THE OVERALL COST
BUT IT'LL IT'LL WAIVER
SOMEWHERE BETWEEN 30 AND 50
PERCENT OF WHAT THE ESTIMATE IS
RIGHT NOW DEPENDING ON HOW THAT
INTEREST ALLOCATION IMPACTS
THAT TOTAL NUMBER.
BUT AS OF RIGHT NOW IN THE
BROWNFIELD PLAN THAT ELIGIBLE
ACTIVITY IS IN THE PLAN AND THE
UNASSIGNED TIF THAT ANYBODY
EVERYBODY HAD BEEN TALKING
ABOUT PREVIOUSLY HAS BEEN
ATTACHED TO THAT ELIGIBLE
ACTIVITY IS RIGHT NOW THE TOTAL
DOLLAR AMOUNT WILL BE IN FLUX
AS WE WORK THROUGH THE FINAL
NUMBERS.
BUT THAT'S WHERE IT IS RIGHT
NOW.
YEP, AND JUST A FOOTNOTE IT
MAYBE IT'S SEMANTICS BUT WHEN
THERE'S A REFERENCE TO EXTRA
TIF WE GET A LITTLE DISHEVELED
BY THAT BECAUSE THAT'S NOT
REALLY WHAT IT IS.
FAIRPOINT.
IT IS NOT A THANK YOU FOR THAT
TIP THAT IS NOT ALLOCATED TO
BOND REPAYMENT.
PRECISION IS A GOOD THING.
>> FURTHER QUESTIONS LIKE THIS
I MR. KNOW, I GOT ONE FINAL
QUESTION FOR YOU.
YES.
YOU HAVE A AAA BOND RATING I'M
SORRY WE HAVE A TRIPLE-A BOND
RATING.
YES.
WE DO.
AM I CORRECT THAT IN THE DURING
THE COURSE OF THIS ENTIRE THIS
ENTIRE ENDEAVOR WE ARE
COGNIZANT OF THE FACT THAT WE
HAVE A AAA BOND RATING AND THE
IMPORTANCE OF THAT TRIPLE-A
BOND RATING TO THE CITY?
YES, MR. MAYOR, THAT'S 1000
PERCENT ACCURATE.
>> THANK YOU SO IN MY FORTY ONE
YEARS OF DOING THIS, THIS IS
THE FIRST CITY WHERE I'VE
ACTUALLY GOTTEN A CITY ALL THE
WAY TO THE TOP.
IT'S NOT BY ACCIDENT AND WE'RE
GOING TO DO EVERYTHING WE CAN
TO MAINTAIN IT.
WE'RE NOT DOING ANYTHING HERE
THAT'S RUNNING COUNTER TO THE
TRIPLE-A RATING THIS COMMUNITY
HAS ACHIEVED.
THANK YOU FOR THE QUESTIONS
.
>> THANK YOU, EVERYBODY.
NOW COME PUBLIC COMMENT,
GENERAL TIME PUBLIC KIND
OF GENERAL PUBLIC TIME AND
GENERAL TIME IS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO
SPEAK TO THE COMMUNITY ABOUT
MATTERS OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST,
TO SPEAK OF PUBLIC COMMON
GENERAL TIME.
ONE NEED NOT HAVE SIGNED UP IN
ADVANCE SPEAKERS IN ALL
INSTANCES WELL THREE MINUTES IN
WHICH TO SPEAK.
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE
TIME CLOCK WILL NOTIFY YOU IN
THIRTY SECONDS REMAINING AND
WHEN YOUR TIME'S EXPIRED WHEN
YOUR TIME'S EXPIRED PLEASE
CONCLUDE YOUR REMARKS AND SEE
THE FLOOR.
>> IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT PUBLIC
?
THANK YOU MAYOR JANE ARE IN
CONTROL KENT GARBER SECOND WORD
THIS IS AN EXCITING PROJECT BUT
IF THIS LEVEL OF PUBLIC
PARTICIPATION AS I UNDERSTAND
IT ABOUT THREE HUNDRED MILLION
DOLLARS OVER THE TERM OF THE
BROWNFIELD PLAN 30 YEARS, THIS
PROJECT SHOULD BE A MODEL
OF CLIMATE RESPONSIBILITY AND
CONFORMANCE TO THE H0 PLAN.
IT FALLS WAY SHORT OF THAT AT
THIS TIME.
TO ITS CREDIT, THE DEVELOPER
WILL BE ELECTRIFYING THE
MULTIFAMILY UNITS WITH HEAT
PUMPS I BELIEVE.
BUT THE THIRTY CONDOS WILL HAVE
A GAS CONNECTION.
WE'LL HAVE OUR GAS COOKING
APPLIANCES AT A MINIMUM THE
RESTAURANT AND RETAIL ALSO
THEY'RE RESERVING GAS FOR ALSO
ZERO PLAN AS YOU KNOW CALLS FOR
ALL NEW CONSTRUCTION BEGINNING
IN TWENTY TWENTY TWO TO NOT
ONLY HAVE NO GAS CONNECTION BUT
TO MEET NET
ZERO ENERGY
STANDARDS.
THIS PROJECT MAKES NO ATTEMPT
TO DO THAT.
TO DO IT IT WOULD PROBABLY HAVE
TO DEVELOP GEOTHERMAL FIELD
UNDERNEATH AND GENERATING
DIFFERENT AMOUNT OF ENERGY ON
SITE.
I'VE HEARD NOTHING ALONG THOSE
LINES.
IN ADDITION THERE WILL BE GAS
CONNECTION TO ALL UNITS FOR
BACKUP GENERATORS.
THIS ALSO GOES AGAINST THE ZERO
PLAN WHICH CALLS FOR BATTERY
STORAGE IN THE EVENT EMERGENCY.
SO MY POINT IS THAT WHILE MANY
OF THESE PROVISIONS ARE
ENFORCEABLE WITH NEW
CONSTRUCTION NOW IN THIS CASE
THE PUBLIC'S MASSIVE
PARTICIPATION SHOULD COMPEL THE
DEVELOPER TO CONFORM FULLY WITH
OUR STANDARD AS SET FORTH IN
THE ZERO PLAN.
>> SO I BELIEVE THIS IS
ACHIEVABLE AND DEVELOPER CAN
STILL GET THE NECESSARY RETURN
ON INVESTMENT.
AT THE VERY LEAST THESE
OPPORTUNITIES SHOULD BE
EXPLORED AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.
THANK YOU.
>> IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN
HOUSE SPEAKER REPUBLICAN.
IS THERE ANYONE ON LINE WHO'D
LIKE TO SPEAK REPUBLICAN
MARRIED OR HAVE ANY CALLERS
ONLINE
SEE NONPUBLIC COMPANIES
CLOSED?
>> ARE THERE COMMUNICATIONS
FROM COUNCIL KARAMOJA PLEASE
MOVE BY DISCUSSING WHEN
DISCUSSION ON FABER POSED WITH
GEORGE